it was suspended from a hook in the wall, and close to the door. She took
it down, but, in doing so, exposed part of the wall and of the floor, which
its folds had previously concealed. Turning away hastily, the chances were
that she had gone without making any discovery. In the act of turning,
however, her light fell brightly on a man's foot and leg. Matchless was her
presence of mind; having previously been humming an air, she continued
to do so. But now came the trial; her sister was bending her steps to the
same closet. If she suffered her to do so, Lottchen would stumble on the
same discovery, and expire of fright. On the other hand, if she gave her a
hint, Lottchen would either fail to understand her, or, gaining but a
glimpse of her meaning, would shriek aloud, or by some equally decisive
expression convey the fatal news to the assassin that he had been
discovered. In this torturing dilemma fear prompted an expedient, which
to Lottchen appeared madness, and to Louisa herself the act of a sibyl
instinct with blind inspiration. "Here," said she, "is our dancing room.
When shall we all meet and dance again together?" Saying which, she
commenced a wild dance, whirling her candle round her head until the
motion extinguished it; then, eddying round her sister in narrowing
circles, she seized Lottchen's candle also, blew it out, and then
interrupted her own singing to attempt a laugh. But the laugh was
hysterical. The darkness, however, favored her; and, seizing her sister's
arm, she forced her along, whispering, "Come, come, come!" Lottchen
could not be so dull as entirely to misunderstand her. She suffered herself
to be led up the first flight of stairs, at the head of which was a room
looking into the street. In this they would have gained an asylum, for the
door had a strong bolt. But, as they were on the last steps of the landing,
they could hear the hard breathing and long strides of the murderer
ascending behind them. He had watched them through a crevice, and had
been satisfied by the hysterical laugh of Louisa that she had seen him. In
the darkness he could not follow fast, from ignorance of the localities,
until he found himself upon the stairs. Louisa, dragging her sister along,
felt strong as with the strength of lunacy, but Lottchen hung like a weight
of lead upon her. She rushed into the room, but at the very entrance
Lottchen fell. At that moment the assassin exchanged his stealthy pace
for a loud clattering ascent. Already he was on the topmost stair; already
he was throwing himself at a bound against the door, when Louisa,
having dragged her sister into the room, closed the door and sent the bolt
home in the very instant that the murderer's hand came into contact with
the handle. Then, from the violence of her emotions, she fell down in a fit,
with her arm around the sister whom she had saved.
How long they lay in this state neither ever knew. The two old ladies had
rushed upstairs on hearing the tumult. Other persons had been concealed
in other parts of the house. The servants found themselves suddenly
locked in, and were not sorry to be saved from a collision which involved
so awful a danger. The old ladies had rushed, side by side, into the very
center of those who were seeking them. Retreat was impossible; two
persons at least were heard following them upstairs. Something like a
shrieking expostulation and counter-expostulation went on between the
ladies and the murderers; then came louder voices--then one heartpiercing shriek, and then another--and then a slow moaning and a dead
silence. Shortly afterwards was heard the first crashing of the door inward
by the mob; but the murderers had fled upon the first alarm, and, to the
astonishment of the servants, had fled upward. Examination, however,
explained this: from a window in the roof they had passed to an adjoining
house recently left empty; and here, as in other cases, we had proof how
apt people are, in the midst of elaborate provisions against remote
dangers, to neglect those which are obvious.
The reign of terror, it may be supposed, had now reached its acme. The
two old ladies were both lying dead at different points on the staircase,
and, as usual, no conjecture could be made as to the nature of the
offense which they had given; but that the murder WAS a vindictive one,
the usual evidence remained behind, in the proofs that no robbery had
been attempted. Two new features, however, were now brought forward
in this system of horrors, one of which riveted the sense of their
insecurity to all families occupying extensive houses, and the other raised
ill blood between the city and the university, such as required years to
allay. The first arose out of the experience, now first obtained, that these
assassins pursued the plan of secreting themselves within the house
where they meditated a murder. All the care, therefore, previously
directed to the securing of doors and windows after nightfall appeared
nugatory. The other feature brought to light on this occasion was vouched
for by one of the servants, who declared that, the moment before the
door of the kitchen was fastened upon herself and fellow servant, she saw
two men in the hall, one on the point of ascending the stairs, the other
making toward the kitchen; that she could not distinguish the faces of
either, but that both were dressed in the academic costume belonging to
the students of the university. The consequences of such a declaration
need scarcely be mentioned. Suspicion settled upon the students, who
were more numerous since the general peace, in a much larger proportion
military, and less select or respectable than heretofore. Still, no part of
the mystery was cleared up by this discovery. Many of the students were
poor enough to feel the temptation that might be offered by any
LUCRATIVE system of outrage. Jealous and painful collusions were, in the
meantime, produced; and, during the latter two months of this winter, it
may be said that our city exhibited the very anarchy of evil passions. This
condition of things lasted until the dawning of another spring.
It will be supposed that communications were made to the supreme
government of the land as soon as the murders in our city were
understood to be no casual occurrences, but links in a systematic series.
Perhaps it might happen from some other business, of a higher kind, just
then engaging the attention of our governors, that our representations did
not make the impression we had expected. We could not, indeed,
complain of absolute neglect from the government. They sent down one
or two of their most accomplished police officers, and they suggested
some counsels, especially that we should examine more strictly into the
quality of the miscellaneous population who occupied our large suburb.
But they more than hinted that no necessity was seen either for
quartering troops upon us, or for arming our local magistracy with ampler
powers.
This correspondence with the central government occupied the month of
March, and, before that time, the bloody system had ceased as abruptly
as it began. The new police officer flattered himself that the terror of his
name had wrought this effect; but judicious people thought otherwise. All,
however, was quiet until the depth of summer, when, by way of hinting to
us, perhaps, that the dreadful power which clothed itself with darkness
had not expired, but was only reposing from its labors, all at once the
chief jailer of the city was missing. He had been in the habit of taking long
rides in the forest, his present situation being much of a sinecure. It was
on the first of July that he was missed. In riding through the city gates
that morning, he had mentioned the direction which he meant to pursue;
and the last time he was seen alive was in one of the forest avenues,
about eight miles from the city, leading toward the point he had indicated.
This jailer was not a man to be regretted on his own account; his life had
been a tissue of cruelty and brutal abuse of his powers, in which he had
been too much supported by the magistrates, partly on the plea that it
was their duty to back their own officers against all complainers, partly
also from the necessities created by the turbulent times for a more
summary exercise of their magisterial authority. No man, therefore, on
his own separate account, could more willingly have been spared than
this brutal jailer; and it was a general remark that, had the murderous
band within our walls swept away this man only, they would have merited
the public gratitude as purifiers from a public nuisance. But was it certain
that the jailer had died by the same hands as had so deeply afflicted the
peace of our city during the winter--or, indeed, that he had been
murdered at all? The forest was too extensive to be searched; and it was
possible that he might have met with some fatal accident. His horse had
returned to the city gates in the night, and was found there in the
morning. Nobody, however, for months could give information about his
rider; and it seemed probable that he would not be discovered until the
autumn and the winter should again carry the sportsman into every
thicket and dingle of this sylvan tract. One person only seemed to have
more knowledge on this subject than others, and that was poor Ferdinand
von Harrelstein. He was now a mere ruin of what he had once been, both
as to intellect and moral feeling; and I observed him frequently smile
when the jailer was mentioned. "Wait," he would say, "till the leaves
begin to drop; then you will see what fine fruit our forest bears." I did not
repeat these expressions to anybody except one friend, who agreed with
me that the jailer had probably been hanged in some recess of the forest,
which summer veiled with its luxuriant umbrage; and that Ferdinand,
constantly wandering in the forest, had discovered the body; but we both
acquitted him of having been an accomplice in the murder.
Meantime the marriage between Margaret Liebenheim and Maximilian was
understood to be drawing near. Yet one thing struck everybody with
astonishment. As far as the young people were concerned, nobody could
doubt that all was arranged; for never was happiness more perfect than
that which seemed to unite them. Margaret was the impersonation of
May-time and youthful rapture; even Maximilian in her presence seemed
to forget his gloom, and the worm which gnawed at his heart was
charmed asleep by the music of her voice, and the paradise of her smiles.
But, until the autumn came, Margaret's grandfather had never ceased to
frown upon this connection, and to support the pretensions of Ferdinand.
The dislike, indeed, seemed reciprocal between him and Maximilian. Each
avoided the other's company and as to the old man, he went so far as to
speak sneeringly of Maximilian. Maximilian despised him too heartily to
speak of him at all. When he could not avoid meeting him, he treated him
with a stern courtesy, which distressed Margaret as often as she
witnessed it. She felt that her grandfather had been the aggressor; and
she felt also that he did injustice to the merits of her lover. But she had a
filial tenderness for the old man, as the father of her sainted mother, and
on his own account, continually making more claims on her pity, as the
decay of his memory, and a childish fretfulness growing upon him from
day to day, marked his increasing imbecility.
Equally mysterious it seemed, that about this time Miss Liebenheim began
to receive anonymous letters, written in the darkest and most menacing
terms. Some of them she showed to me. I could not guess at their drift.
Evidently they glanced at Maximilian, and bade her beware of connection
with him; and dreadful things were insinuated about him. Could these
letters be written by Ferdinand? Written they were not, but could they be
dictated by him? Much I feared that they were; and the more so for one
reason.
All at once, and most inexplicably, Margaret's grandfather showed a total
change of opinion in his views as to her marriage. Instead of favoring
Harrelstein's pretensions, as he had hitherto done, he now threw the
feeble weight of his encouragement into Maximilian's scale; though, from
the situation of all the parties, nobody attached any PRACTICAL
importance to the change in Mr. Liebenheim's way of thinking. Nobody? Is
that true? No; one person DID attach the greatest weight to the change--
poor, ruined Ferdinand. He, so long as there was one person to take his
part, so long as the grandfather of Margaret showed countenance to
himself, had still felt his situation not utterly desperate.
Thus were things situated, when in November, all the leaves daily blowing
off from the woods, and leaving bare the most secret haunts of the
thickets, the body of the jailer was left exposed in the forest; but not, as I
and my friend had conjectured, hanged. No; he had died apparently by a
more horrid death--by that of crucifixion. The tree, a remarkable one,
bore upon a part of its trunk this brief but savage inscription:--"T. H.,
jailer at -----; Crucified July 1, 1816."
A great deal of talk went on throughout the city upon this discovery;
nobody uttered one word of regret on account of the wretched jailer; on
the contrary, the voice of vengeance, rising up in many a cottage,
reached my ears in every direction as I walked abroad. The hatred in
itself seemed horrid and unchristian, and still more so after the man's
death; but, though horrid and fiendish for itself, it was much more
impressive, considered as the measure and exponent of the damnable
oppression which must have existed to produce it.
At first, when the absence of the jailer was a recent occurrence, and the
presence of the murderers among us was, in consequence, revived to our
anxious thoughts, it was an event which few alluded to without fear. But
matters were changed now; the jailer had been dead for months, and this
interval, during which the murderer's hand had slept, encouraged
everybody to hope that the storm had passed over our city; that peace
had returned to our hearths; and that henceforth weakness might sleep in
safety, and innocence without anxiety. Once more we had peace within
our walls, and tranquillity by our firesides. Again the child went to bed in
cheerfulness, and the old man said his prayers in serenity. Confidence
was restored; peace was re-established; and once again the sanctity of
human life became the rule and the principle for all human hands among
us. Great was the joy; the happiness was universal.
O heavens! by what a thunderbolt were we awakened from our security!
On the night of the twenty-seventh of December, half an hour, it might
be, after twelve o'clock, an alarm was given that all was not right in the
house of Mr. Liebenheim. Vast was the crowd which soon collected in
breathless agitation. In two minutes a man who had gone round by the
back of the house was heard unbarring Mr. Liebenheim's door: he was
incapable of uttering a word; but his gestures, as he threw the door open
and beckoned to the crowd, were quite enough. In the hall, at the further
extremity, and as if arrested in the act of making for the back door, lay
the bodies of old Mr. Liebenheim and one of his sisters, an aged widow;
on the stair lay another sister, younger and unmarried, but upward of
sixty. The hall and lower flight of stairs were floating with blood. Where,
then, was Miss Liebenheim, the granddaughter? That was the universal
cry; for she was beloved as generally as she was admired. Had the
infernal murderers been devilish enough to break into that temple of
innocent and happy life? Everyone asked the question, and everyone held
his breath to listen; but for a few moments no one dared to advance; for
the silence of the house was ominous. At length some one cried out that
Miss Liebenheim had that day gone upon a visit to a friend, whose house
was forty miles distant in the forest. "Aye," replied another," she had
settled to go; but I heard that something had stopped her." The suspense
was now at its height, and the crowd passed from room to room, but
found no traces of Miss Liebenheim. At length they ascended the stair,
and in the very first room, a small closet, or boudoir, lay Margaret, with
her dress soiled hideously with blood. The first impression was that she
also had been murdered; but, on a nearer approach, she appeared to be
unwounded, and was manifestly alive. Life had not departed, for her
breath sent a haze over a mirror, but it was suspended, and she was
laboring in some kind of fit. The first act of the crowd was to carry her
into the house of a friend on the opposite side of the street, by which time
medical assistance had crowded to the spot. Their attentions to Miss
Liebenheim had naturally deranged the condition of things in the little
room, but not before many people found time to remark that one of the
murderers must have carried her with his bloody hands to the sofa on
which she lay, for water had been sprinkled profusely over her face and
throat, and water was even placed ready to her hand, when she might
happen to recover, upon a low foot-stool by the side of the sofa.
On the following morning, Maximilian, who had been upon a hunting party
in the forest, returned to the city, and immediately learned the news. I
did not see him for some hours after, but he then appeared to me
thoroughly agitated, for the first time I had known him to be so. In the
evening another perplexing piece of intelligence transpired with regard to
Miss Liebenheim, which at first afflicted every friend of that young lady. It
was that she had been seized with the pains of childbirth, and delivered of
a son, who, however, being born prematurely, did not live many hours.
Scandal, however, was not allowed long to batten upon this imaginary
triumph, for within two hours after the circulation of this first rumor,
followed a second, authenticated, announcing that Maximilian had
appeared with the confessor of the Liebenheim family, at the residence of
the chief magistrate, and there produced satisfactory proofs of his
marriage with Miss Liebenheim, which had been duly celebrated, though
with great secrecy, nearly eight months before. In our city, as in all the
cities of our country, clandestine marriages, witnessed, perhaps, by two
friends only of the parties, besides the officiating priest, are exceedingly
common. In the mere fact, therefore, taken separately, there was nothing
to surprise us, but, taken in connection with the general position of the
parties, it DID surprise us all; nor could we conjecture the reason for a
step apparently so needless. For, that Maximilian could have thought it
any point of prudence or necessity to secure the hand of Margaret
Liebenheim by a private marriage, against the final opposition of her
grandfather, nobody who knew the parties, who knew the perfect love
which possessed Miss Liebenbeim, the growing imbecility of her
grandfather, or the utter contempt with which Maximilian regarded him,
could for a moment believe. Altogether, the matter was one of profound
mystery.
Meantime, it rejoiced me that poor Margaret's name had been thus
rescued from the fangs of the scandalmongers. These harpies had their
prey torn from them at the very moment when they were sitting down to
the unhallowed banquet. For this I rejoiced, but else there was little
subject for rejoicing in anything which concerned poor Margaret. Long she
lay in deep insensibility, taking no notice of anything, rarely opening her
eyes, and apparently unconscious of the revolutions, as they succeeded,
of morning or evening, light or darkness, yesterday or to-day. Great was
the agitation which convulsed the heart of Maximilian during this period;
he walked up and down in the cathedral nearly all day long, and the
ravages which anxiety was working in his physical system might be read
in his face. People felt it an intrusion upon the sanctity of his grief to look
at him too narrowly, and the whole town sympathized with his situation.
At length a change took place in Margaret, but one which the medical
men announced to Maximilian as boding ill for her recovery. The
wanderings of her mind did not depart, but they altered their character.
She became more agitated; she would start up suddenly, and strain her
eye-sight after some figure which she seemed to see; then she would
apostrophize some person in the most piteous terms, beseeching him,
with streaming eyes, to spare her old grandfather. "Look, look," she
would cry out, "look at his gray hairs! O, sir! he is but a child; he does not
know what he says; and he will soon be out of the way and in his grave;
and very soon, sir, he will give you no more trouble." Then, again, she
would mutter indistinctly for hours together; sometimes she would cry out
frantically, and say things which terrified the bystanders, and which the
physicians would solemnly caution them how they repeated; then she
would weep, and invoke Maximilian to come and aid her. But seldom,
indeed, did that name pass her lips that she did not again begin to strain
her eyeballs, and start up in bed to watch some phantom of her poor,
fevered heart, as if it seemed vanishing into some mighty distance.
After nearly seven weeks passed in this agitating state, suddenly, on one
morning, the earliest and the loveliest of dawning spring, a change was
announced to us all as having taken place in Margaret; but it was a
change, alas! that ushered in the last great change of all. The conflict,
which had for so long a period raged within her, and overthrown her
reason, was at an end; the strife was over, and nature was settling into
an everlasting rest. In the course of the night she had recovered her
senses. When the morning light penetrated through her curtain, she
recognized her attendants, made inquiries as to the month and the day of
the month, and then, sensible that she could not outlive the day, she
requested that her confessor might be summoned.
About an hour and a half the confessor remained alone with her. At the
end of that time he came out, and hastily summoned the attendants, for
Margaret, he said, was sinking into a fainting fit. The confessor himself
might have passed through many a fit, so much was he changed by the
results of this interview. I crossed him coming out of the house. I spoke
to him--I called to him; but he heard me not--he saw me not. He saw
nobody. Onward he strode to the cathedral, where Maximilian was sure to
be found, pacing about upon the graves. Him he seized by the arm,
whispered something into his ear, and then both retired into one of the
many sequestered chapels in which lights are continually burning. There
they had some conversation, but not very long, for within five minutes
Maximilian strode away to the house in which his young wife was dying.
One step seemed to carry him upstairs. The attendants, according to the
directions they had received from the physicians, mustered at the head of
the stairs to oppose him. But that was idle: before the rights which he
held as a lover and a husband-- before the still more sacred rights of
grief, which he carried in his countenance, all opposition fled like a dream.
There was, besides, a fury in his eye. A motion of his hand waved them
off like summer flies; he entered the room, and once again, for the last
time, he was in company with his beloved.
What passed who could pretend to guess? Something more than two
hours had elapsed, during which Margaret had been able to talk
occasionally, which was known, because at times the attendants heard
the sound of Maximilian's voice evidently in tones of reply to something
which she had said. At the end of that time, a little bell, placed near the
bedside, was rung hastily. A fainting fit had seized Margaret; but she
recovered almost before her women applied the usual remedies. They
lingered, however, a little, looking at the youthful couple with an interest
which no restraints availed to check. Their hands were locked together,
and in Margaret's eyes there gleamed a farewell light of love, which
settled upon Maximilian, and seemed to indicate that she was becoming
speechless. Just at this moment she made a feeble effort to draw
Maximilian toward her; he bent forward and kissed her with an anguish
that made the most callous weep, and then he whispered something into
her ear, upon which the attendants retired, taking this as a proof that
their presence was a hindrance to a free communication. But they heard
no more talking, and in less than ten minutes they returned. Maximilian
and Margaret still retained their former position. Their hands were fast
locked together; the same parting ray of affection, the same farewell light
of love, was in the eye of Margaret, and still it settled upon Maximilian.
But her eyes were beginning to grow dim; mists were rapidly stealing
over them. Maximilian, who sat stupefied and like one not in his right
mind, now, at the gentle request of the women, resigned his seat, for the
hand which had clasped his had already relaxed its hold; the farewell
gleam of love had departed. One of the women closed her eyelids; and
there fell asleep forever the loveliest flower that our city had reared for
generations.
The funeral took place on the fourth day after her death. In the morning
of that day, from strong affection--having known her from an infant--I
begged permission to see the corpse. She was in her coffin; snowdrops
and crocuses were laid upon her innocent bosom, and roses, of that sort
which the season allowed, over her person. These and other lovely
symbols of youth, of springtime, and of resurrection, caught my eye for
the first moment; but in the next it fell upon her face. Mighty God! what a
change! what a transfiguration! Still, indeed, there was the same innocent
sweetness; still there was something of the same loveliness; the
expression still remained; but for the features--all trace of flesh seemed
to have vanished; mere outline of bony structure remained; mere
pencilings and shadowings of what she once had been. This is, indeed, I
exclaimed, "dust to dust--ashes to ashes!"
Maximilian, to the astonishment of everybody, attended the funeral. It
was celebrated in the cathedral. All made way for him, and at times he
seemed collected; at times he reeled like one who was drunk. He heard
as one who hears not; he saw as one in a dream. The whole ceremony
went on by torchlight, and toward the close he stood like a pillar,
motionless, torpid, frozen. But the great burst of the choir, and the
mighty blare ascending from our vast organ at the closing of the grave,
recalled him to himself, and he strode rapidly homeward. Half an hour
after I returned, I was summoned to his bedroom. He was in bed, calm
and collected. What he said to me I remember as if it had been
yesterday, and the very tone with which he said it, although more than
twenty years have passed since then. He began thus: "I have not long to
live"; and when he saw me start, suddenly awakened into a
consciousness that perhaps he had taken poison, and meant to intimate
as much, he continued: "You fancy I have taken poison;--no matter
whether I have or not; if I have, the poison is such that no antidote will
now avail; or, if they would, you well know that some griefs are of a kind
which leave no opening to any hope. What difference, therefore, can it
make whether I leave this earth to-day, to- morrow, or the next day? Be
assured of this--that whatever I have determined to do is past all power
of being affected by a human opposition. Occupy yourself not with any
fruitless attempts, but calmly listen to me, else I know what to do."
Seeing a suppressed fury in his eye, notwithstanding I saw also some
change stealing over his features as if from some subtle poison beginning
to work upon his frame, awestruck I consented to listen, and sat still. "It
is well that you do so, for my time is short. Here is my will, legally drawn
up, and you will see that I have committed an immense property to your
discretion. Here, again, is a paper still more important in my eyes; it is
also testamentary, and binds you to duties which may not be so easy to
execute as the disposal of my property. But now listen to something else,
which concerns neither of these papers. Promise me, in the first place,
solemnly, that whenever I die you will see me buried in the same grave
as my wife, from whose funeral we are just returned. Promise."--I
promised.-- "Swear."--I swore.--"Finally, promise me that, when you read
this second paper which I have put into your hands, whatsoever you may
think of it, you will say nothing--publish nothing to the world until three
years shall have passed."--I promised.--"And now farewell for three
hours. Come to me again about ten o'clock, and take a glass of wine in
memory of old times." This he said laughingly; but even then a dark
spasm crossed his face. Yet, thinking that this might be the mere working
of mental anguish within him, I complied with his desire, and retired.
Feeling, however, but little at ease, I devised an excuse for looking in
upon him about one hour and a half after I had left him. I knocked gently
at his door; there was no answer. I knocked louder; still no answer. I
went in. The light of day was gone, and I could see nothing. But I was
alarmed by the utter stillness of the room. I listened earnestly, but not a
breath could be heard. I rushed back hastily into the hall for a lamp; I
returned; I looked in upon this marvel of manly beauty, and the first
glance informed me that he and all his splendid endowments had
departed forever. He had died, probably, soon after I left him, and had
dismissed me from some growing instinct which informed him that his last
agonies were at hand.
I took up his two testamentary documents; both were addressed in the
shape of letters to myself. The first was a rapid though distinct
appropriation of his enormous property. General rules were laid down,
upon which the property was to be distributed, but the details were left to
my discretion, and to the guidance of circumstances as they should
happen to emerge from the various inquiries which it would become
necessary to set on foot. This first document I soon laid aside, both
because I found that its provisions were dependent for their meaning
upon the second, and because to this second document I looked with
confidence for a solution of many mysteries;--of the profound sadness
which had, from the first of my acquaintance with him, possessed a man
so gorgeously endowed as the favorite of nature and fortune; of his
motives for huddling up, in a clandestine manner, that connection which
formed the glory of his life; and possibly (but then I hesitated) of the late
unintelligible murders, which still lay under as profound a cloud as ever.
Much of this WOULD be unveiled-- all might be: and there and then, with
the corpse lying beside me of the gifted and mysterious writer, I seated
myself, and read the following statement:
"MARCH 26, 1817.
"My trial is finished; my conscience, my duty, my honor, are liberated;
my 'warfare is accomplished.' Margaret, my innocent young wife, I have
seen for the last time. Her, the crown that might have been of my earthly
felicity--her, the one temptation to put aside the bitter cup which awaited
me--her, sole seductress (O innocent seductress!) from the stern duties
which my fate had imposed upon me--her, even her, I have sacrificed.
"Before I go, partly lest the innocent should be brought into question for
acts almost exclusively mine, but still more lest the lesson and the
warning which God, by my hand, has written in blood upon your guilty
walls, should perish for want of its authentic exposition, hear my last
dying avowal, that the murders which have desolated so many families
within your walls, and made the household hearth no sanctuary, age no
charter of protection, are all due originally to my head, if not always to
my hand, as the minister of a dreadful retribution.
"That account of my history, and my prospects, which you received from
the Russian diplomatist, among some errors of little importance, is
essentially correct. My father was not so immediately connected with
English blood as is there represented. However, it is true that he claimed
descent from an English family of even higher distinction than that which
is assigned in the Russian statement. He was proud of this English
descent, and the more so as the war with revolutionary France brought
out more prominently than ever the moral and civil grandeur of England.
This pride was generous, but it was imprudent in his situation. His
immediate progenitors had been settled in Italy--at Rome first, but
latterly at Milan; and his whole property, large and scattered, came, by
the progress of the revolution, to stand under French domination. Many
spoliations he suffered; but still he was too rich to be seriously injured.
But he foresaw, in the progress of events, still greater perils menacing his
most capital resources. Many of the states or princes in Italy were deeply
in his debt; and, in the great convulsions which threatened his country,
he saw that both the contending parties would find a colorable excuse for
absolving themselves from engagements which pressed unpleasantly
upon their finances. In this embarrassment he formed an intimacy with a
French officer of high rank and high principle. My father's friend saw his
danger, and advised him to enter the French service. In his younger days,
my father had served extensively under many princes, and had found in
every other military service a spirit of honor governing the conduct of the
officers. Here only, and for the first time, he found ruffian manners and
universal rapacity. He could not draw his sword in company with such
men, nor in such a cause. But at length, under the pressure of necessity,
he accepted (or rather bought with an immense bribe) the place of a
commissary to the French forces in Italy. With this one resource,
eventually he succeeded in making good the whole of his public claims
upon the Italian states. These vast sums he remitted, through various
channels, to England, where he became proprietor in the funds to an
immense amount. Incautiously, however, something of this transpired,
and the result was doubly unfortunate; for, while his intentions were thus
made known as finally pointing to England, which of itself made him an
object of hatred and suspicion, it also diminished his means of bribery.
These considerations, along with another, made some French officers of
high rank and influence the bitter enemies of my father. My mother,
whom he had married when holding a brigadier-general's commission in
the Austrian service, was, by birth and by religion, a Jewess. She was of
exquisite beauty, and had been sought in Morganatic marriage by an
archduke of the Austrian family; but she had relied upon this plea, that
hers was the purest and noblest blood among all Jewish families-- that
her family traced themselves, by tradition and a vast series of
attestations under the hands of the Jewish high priests, to the Maccabees,
and to the royal houses of Judea; and that for her it would be a
degradation to accept even of a sovereign prince on the terms of such
marriage. This was no vain pretension of ostentatious vanity. It was one
which had been admitted as valid for time immemorial in Transylvania
and adjacent countries, where my mother's family were rich and honored,
and took their seat among the dignitaries of the land. The French officers
I have alluded to, without capacity for anything so dignified as a deep
passion, but merely in pursuit of a vagrant fancy that would, on the next
day, have given place to another equally fleeting, had dared to insult my
mother with proposals the most licentious--proposals as much below her
rank and birth, as, at any rate, they would have been below her dignity of
mind and her purity. These she had communicated to my father, who
bitterly resented the chains of subordination which tied up his hands from
avenging his injuries. Still his eye told a tale which his superiors could
brook as little as they could the disdainful neglect of his wife. More than
one had been concerned in the injuries to my father and mother; more
than one were interested in obtaining revenge. Things could be done in
German towns, and by favor of old German laws or usages, which even in
France could not have been tolerated. This my father's enemies well
knew, but this my father also knew; and he endeavored to lay down his
office of commissary. That, however, was a favor which he could not
obtain. He was compelled to serve on the German campaign then
commencing, and on the subsequent one of Friedland and Eylau. Here he
was caught in some one of the snares laid for him; first trepanned into an
act which violated some rule of the service; and then provoked into a
breach of discipline against the general officer who had thus trepanned
him. Now was the long-sought opportunity gained, and in that very
quarter of Germany best fitted for improving it. My father was thrown into
prison in your city, subjected to the atrocious oppression of your jailer,
and the more detestable oppression of your local laws. The charges
against him were thought even to affect his life, and he was humbled into
suing for permission to send for his wife and children. Already, to his
proud spirit, it was punishment enough that he should be reduced to sue
for favor to one of his bitterest foes. But it was no part of their plan to
refuse THAT. By way of expediting my mother's arrival, a military courier,
with every facility for the journey, was forwarded to her without delay. My
mother, her two daughters, and myself, were then residing in Venice. I
had, through the aid of my father's connections in Austria, been
appointed in the imperial service, and held a high commission for my age.
But, on my father's marching northward with the French army, I had been
recalled as an indispensable support to my mother. Not that my years
could have made me such, for I had barely accomplished my twelfth year;
but my premature growth, and my military station, had given me
considerable knowledge of the world and presence of mind.
"Our journey I pass over; but as I approach your city, that sepulcher of
honor and happiness to my poor family, my heart beats with frantic
emotions. Never do I see that venerable dome of your minster from the
forest, but I curse its form, which reminds me of what we then surveyed
for many a mile as we traversed the forest. For leagues before we
approached the city, this object lay before us in relief upon the frosty blue
sky; and still it seemed never to increase. Such was the complaint of my
little sister Mariamne. Most innocent child! would that it never had
increased for thy eyes, but remained forever at a distance! That same
hour began the series of monstrous indignities which terminated the
career of my ill-fated family. As we drew up to the city gates, the officer
who inspected the passports, finding my mother and sisters described as
Jewesses, which in my mother's ears (reared in a region where Jews are
not dishonored) always sounded a title of distinction, summoned a
subordinate agent, who in coarse terms demanded his toll. We presumed
this to be a road tax for the carriage and horses, but we were quickly
undeceived; a small sum was demanded for each of my sisters and my
mother, as for so many head of cattle. I, fancying some mistake, spoke to
the man temperately, and, to do him justice, he did not seem desirous of
insulting us; but he produced a printed board, on which, along with the
vilest animals, Jews and Jewesses were rated at so much a head. While
we were debating the point, the officers of the gate wore a sneering smile
upon their faces-- the postilions were laughing together; and this, too, in
the presence of three creatures whose exquisite beauty, in different
styles, agreeably to their different ages, would have caused noblemen to
have fallen down and worshiped. My mother, who had never yet met with
any flagrant insult on account of her national distinctions, was too much
shocked to be capable of speaking. I whispered to her a few words,
recalling her to her native dignity of mind, paid the money, and we drove
to the prison. But the hour was past at which we could be admitted, and,
as Jewesses, my mother and sisters could not be allowed to stay in the
city; they were to go into the Jewish quarter, a part of the suburb set
apart for Jews, in which it was scarcely possible to obtain a lodging
tolerably clean. My father, on the next day, we found, to our horror, at
the point of death. To my mother he did not tell the worst of what he had
endured. To me he told that, driven to madness by the insults offered to
him, he had upbraided the court- martial with their corrupt propensities,
and had even mentioned that overtures had been made to him for
quashing the proceedings in return for a sum of two millions of francs;
and that his sole reason for not entertaining the proposal was his distrust
of those who made it. 'They would have taken my money,' said he, 'and
then found a pretext for putting me to death, that I might tell no secrets.'
This was too near the truth to be tolerated; in concert with the local
authorities, the military enemies of my father conspired against him--
witnesses were suborned; and, finally, under some antiquated law of the
place, he was subjected, in secret, to a mode of torture which still lingers
in the east of Europe.
"He sank under the torture and the degradation. I, too, thoughtlessly, but
by a natural movement of filial indignation, suffered the truth to escape
me in conversing with my mother. And she--;but I will preserve the
regular succession of things. My father died; but he had taken such
measures, in concert with me, that his enemies should never benefit by
his property. Meantime my mother and sisters had closed my father's
eyes; had attended his remains to the grave; and in every act connected
with this last sad rite had met with insults and degradations too mighty
for human patience. My mother, now become incapable of self-command,
in the fury of her righteous grief, publicly and in court denounced the
conduct of the magistracy--taxed some of them with the vilest proposals
to herself--taxed them as a body with having used instruments of torture
upon my father; and, finally, accused them of collusion with the French
military oppressors of the district. This last was a charge under which
they quailed; for by that time the French had made themselves odious to
all who retained a spark of patriotic feeling. My heart sank within me
when I looked up at the bench, this tribunal of tyrants, all purple or livid
with rage; when I looked at them alternately and at my noble mother
with her weeping daughters--these so powerless, those so basely
vindictive, and locally so omnipotent. Willingly I would have sacrificed all
my wealth for a simple permission to quit this infernal city with my poor
female relations safe and undishonored. But far other were the intentions
of that incensed magistracy. My mother was arrested, charged with some
offense equal to petty treason, or scandalum magnatum, or the sowing of
sedition; and, though what she said was true, where, alas! was she to
look for evidence? Here was seen the want of gentlemen. Gentlemen, had
they been even equally tyrannical, would have recoiled with shame from
taking vengeance on a woman. And what a vengeance! O heavenly
powers! that I should live to mention such a thing! Man that is born of
woman, to inflict upon woman personal scourging on the bare back, and
through the streets at noonday! Even for Christian women the
punishment was severe which the laws assigned to the offense in
question. But for Jewesses, by one of the ancient laws against that
persecuted people, far heavier and more degrading punishments were
annexed to almost every offense. What else could be looked for in a city
which welcomed its Jewish guests by valuing them at its gates as brute
beasts? Sentence was passed, and the punishment was to be inflicted on
two separate days, with an interval between each-- doubtless to prolong
the tortures of mind, but under a vile pretense of alleviating the physical
torture. Three days after would come the first day of punishment. My
mother spent the time in reading her native Scriptures; she spent it in
prayer and in musing; while her daughters clung and wept around her
day and night--groveling on the ground at the feet of any people in
authority that entered their mother's cell. That same interval-- how was it
passed by me? Now mark, my friend. Every man in office, or that could
be presumed to bear the slightest influence, every wife, mother, sister,
daughter of such men, I besieged morning, noon, and night. I wearied
them with my supplications. I humbled myself to the dust; I, the
haughtiest of God's creatures, knelt and prayed to them for the sake of
my mother. I besought them that I might undergo the punishment ten
times over in her stead. And once or twice I DID obtain the
encouragement of a few natural tears--given more, however, as I was
told, to my piety than to my mother's deserts. But rarely was I heard out
with patience; and from some houses repelled with personal indignities.
The day came: I saw my mother half undressed by the base officials; I
heard the prison gates expand; I heard the trumpets of the magistracy
sound. She had warned me what to do; I had warned myself. Would I
sacrifice a retribution sacred and comprehensive, for the momentary
triumph over an individual? If not, let me forbear to look out of doors; for
I felt that in the selfsame moment in which I saw the dog of an
executioner raise his accursed hand against my mother, swifter than the
lightning would my dagger search his heart. When I heard the roar of the
cruel mob, I paused--endured--forbore. I stole out by by-lanes of the city
from my poor exhausted sisters, whom I left sleeping in each other's
innocent arms, into the forest. There I listened to the shouting populace;
there even I fancied that I could trace my poor mother's route by the
course of the triumphant cries. There, even then, even then, I made--O
silent forest! thou heardst me when I made--a vow that I have kept too
faithfully. Mother, thou art avenged: sleep, daughter of Jerusalem! for at
length the oppressor sleeps with thee. And thy poor son has paid, in
discharge of his vow, the forfeit of his own happiness, of a paradise
opening upon earth, of a heart as innocent as thine, and a face as fair.
"I returned, and found my mother returned. She slept by starts, but she
was feverish and agitated; and when she awoke and first saw me, she
blushed, as if I could think that real degradation had settled upon her.
Then it was that I told her of my vow. Her eyes were lambent with fierce
light for a moment; but, when I went on more eagerly to speak of my
hopes and projects, she called me to her--kissed me, and whispered: 'Oh,
not so, my son! think not of me--think not of vengeance--think only of
poor Berenice and Mariamne.' Aye, that thought WAS startling. Yet this
magnanimous and forbearing mother, as I knew by the report of our one
faithful female servant, had, in the morning, during her bitter trial,
behaved as might have become a daughter of Judas Maccabaeus: she had
looked serenely upon the vile mob, and awed even them by her serenity;
she had disdained to utter a shriek when the cruel lash fell upon her fair
skin. There is a point that makes the triumph over natural feelings of pain
easy or not easy--the degree in which we count upon the sympathy of the
bystanders. My mother had it not in the beginning; but, long before the
end, her celestial beauty, the divinity of injured innocence, the pleading of
common womanhood in the minds of the lowest class, and the reaction of
manly feeling in the men, had worked a great change in the mob. Some
began now to threaten those who had been active in insulting her. The
silence of awe and respect succeeded to noise and uproar; and feelings
which they scarcely understood, mastered the rude rabble as they
witnessed more and more the patient fortitude of the sufferer. Menaces
began to rise toward the executioner. Things wore such an aspect that
the magistrates put a sudden end to the scene.
"That day we received permission to go home to our poor house in the
Jewish quarter. I know not whether you are learned enough in Jewish
usages to be aware that in every Jewish house, where old traditions are
kept up, there is one room consecrated to confusion; a room always
locked up and sequestered from vulgar use, except on occasions of
memorable affliction, where everything is purposely in disorder--broken--
shattered--mutilated: to typify, by symbols appalling to the eye, that
desolation which has so long trampled on Jerusalem, and the ravages of
the boar within the vineyards of Judea. My mother, as a Hebrew princess,
maintained all traditional customs. Even in this wretched suburb she had
her 'chamber of desolation.' There it was that I and my sisters heard her
last words. The rest of her sentence was to be carried into effect within a
week. She, meantime, had disdained to utter any word of fear; but that
energy of self-control had made the suffering but the more bitter. Fever
and dreadful agitation had succeeded. Her dreams showed sufficiently to
us, who watched her couch, that terror for the future mingled with the
sense of degradation for the past. Nature asserted her rights. But the
more she shrank from the suffering, the more did she proclaim how
severe it had been, and consequently how noble the self-conquest. Yet, as
her weakness increased, so did her terror; until I besought her to take
comfort, assuring her that, in case any attempt should be made to force
her out again to public exposure, I would kill the man who came to
execute the order--that we would all die together--and there would be a
common end to her injuries and her fears. She was reassured by what I
told her of my belief that no future attempt would be made upon her. She
slept more tranquilly--but her fever increased; and slowly she slept away
into the everlasting sleep which knows of no to-morrow.
"Here came a crisis in my fate. Should I stay and attempt to protect my
sisters? But, alas! what power had I to do so among our enemies?
Rachael and I consulted; and many a scheme we planned. Even while we
consulted, and the very night after my mother had been committed to the
Jewish burying ground, came an officer, bearing an order for me to repair
to Vienna. Some officer in the French army, having watched the
transaction respecting my parents, was filled with shame and grief. He
wrote a statement of the whole to an Austrian officer of rank, my father's
friend, who obtained from the emperor an order, claiming me as a page
of his own, and an officer in the household service. O heavens! what a
neglect that it did not include my sisters! However, the next best thing
was that I should use my influence at the imperial court to get them
passed to Vienna. This I did, to the utmost of my power. But seven
months elapsed before I saw the emperor. If my applications ever met his
eye he might readily suppose that your city, my friend, was as safe a
place as another for my sisters. Nor did I myself know all its dangers. At
length, with the emperor's leave of absence, I returned. And what did I
find? Eight months had passed, and the faithful Rachael had died. The
poor sisters, clinging together, but now utterly bereft of friends, knew not
which way to turn. In this abandonment they fell into the insidious hands
of the ruffian jailer. My eldest sister, Berenice, the stateliest and noblest
of beauties, had attracted this ruffian's admiration while she was in the
prison with her mother. And when I returned to your city, armed with the
imperial passports for all, I found that Berenice had died in the villain's
custody; nor could I obtain anything beyond a legal certificate of her
death. And, finally, the blooming, laughing Mariamne, she also had died--
and of affliction for the loss of her sister. You, my friend, had been absent
upon your travels during the calamitous history I have recited. You had
seen neither my father nor my mother. But you came in time to take
under your protection, from the abhorred wretch the jailer, my little
broken-hearted Mariamne. And when sometimes you fancied that you had
seen me under other circumstances, in her it was, my dear friend, and in
her features that you saw mine.
"Now was the world a desert to me. I cared little, in the way of love,
which way I turned. But in the way of hatred I cared everything. I
transferred myself to the Russian service, with the view of gaining some
appointment on the Polish frontier, which might put it in my power to
execute my vow of destroying all the magistrates of your city. War,
however, raged, and carried me into far other regions. It ceased, and
there was little prospect that another generation would see it relighted;
for the disturber of peace was a prisoner forever, and all nations were
exhausted. Now, then, it became necessary that I should adopt some new
mode for executing my vengeance; and the more so, because annually
some were dying of those whom it was my mission to punish. A voice
ascended to me, day and night, from the graves of my father and mother,
calling for vengeance before it should be too late.
I took my measures thus: Many Jews were present at Waterloo. From
among these, all irritated against Napoleon for the expectations he had
raised, only to disappoint, by his great assembly of Jews at Paris, I
selected eight, whom I knew familiarly as men hardened by military
experience against the movements of pity. With these as my beagles, I
hunted for some time in your forest before opening my regular campaign;
and I am surprised that you did not hear of the death which met the
executioner--him I mean who dared to lift his hand against my mother.
This man I met by accident in the forest; and I slew him. I talked with the
wretch, as a stranger at first, upon the memorable case of the Jewish
lady. Had he relented, had he expressed compunction, I might have
relented. But far otherwise: the dog, not dreaming to whom he spoke,
exulted; he-- But why repeat the villain's words? I cut him to pieces. Next
I did this: My agents I caused to matriculate separately at the college.
They assumed the college dress. And now mark the solution of that
mystery which caused such perplexity. Simply as students we all had an
unsuspected admission at any house. Just then there was a common
practice, as you will remember, among the younger students, of going out
a masking--that is, of entering houses in the academic dress, and with
the face masked. This practice subsisted even during the most intense
alarm from the murderers; for the dress of the students was supposed to
bring protection along with it. But, even after suspicion had connected
itself with this dress, it was sufficient that I should appear unmasked at
the head of the maskers, to insure them a friendly reception. Hence the
facility with which death was inflicted, and that unaccountable absence of
any motion toward an alarm. I took hold of my victim, and he looked at
me with smiling security. Our weapons were hid under our academic
robes; and even when we drew them out, and at the moment of applying
them to the threat, they still supposed our gestures to be part of the
pantomime we were performing. Did I relish this abuse of personal
confidence in myself? No--I loathed it, and I grieved for its necessity; but
my mother, a phantom not seen with bodily eyes, but ever present to my
mind, continually ascended before me; and still I shouted aloud to my
astounded victim, 'This comes from the Jewess! Hound of hounds! Do you
remember the Jewess whom you dishonored, and the oaths which you
broke in order that you might dishonor her, and the righteous law which
you violated, and the cry of anguish from her son which you scoffed at?'
Who I was, what I avenged, and whom, I made every man aware, and
every woman, before I punished them. The details of the cases I need not
repeat. One or two I was obliged, at the beginning, to commit to my
Jews. The suspicion was thus, from the first, turned aside by the notoriety
of my presence elsewhere; but I took care that none suffered who had
not either been upon the guilty list of magistrates who condemned the
mother, or of those who turned away with mockery from the supplication
of the son.
"It pleased God, however, to place a mighty temptation in my path, which
might have persuaded me to forego all thoughts of vengeance, to forget
my vow, to forget the voices which invoked me from the grave. This was
Margaret Liebenheim. Ah! how terrific appeared my duty of bloody
retribution, after her angel's face and angel's voice had calmed me. With
respect to her grandfather, strange it is to mention, that never did my
innocent wife appear so lovely as precisely in the relation of
granddaughter. So beautiful was her goodness to the old man, and so
divine was the childlike innocence on her part, contrasted with the guilty
recollections associated with him--for he was among the guiltiest toward
my mother--still I delayed HIS punishment to the last; and, for his child's
sake, I would have pardoned him--nay, I had resolved to do so, when a
fierce Jew, who had a deep malignity toward this man, swore that he
would accomplish HIS vengeance at all events, and perhaps might be
obliged to include Margaret in the ruin, unless I adhered to the original
scheme. Then I yielded; for circumstances armed this man with
momentary power. But the night fixed on was one in which I had reason
to know that my wife would be absent; for so I had myself arranged with
her, and the unhappy counter-arrangement I do not yet understand. Let
me add, that the sole purpose of my clandestine marriage was to sting
her grandfather's mind with the belief that HIS family had been
dishonored, even as he had dishonored mine. He learned, as I took care
that he should, that his granddaughter carried about with her the
promises of a mother, and did not know that she had the sanction of a
wife. This discovery made him, in one day, become eager for the
marriage he had previously opposed; and this discovery also embittered
the misery of his death. At that moment I attempted to think only of my
mother's wrongs; but, in spite of all I could do, this old man appeared to
me in the light of Margaret's grandfather--and, had I been left to myself,
he would have been saved. As it was, never was horror equal to mine
when I met her flying to his succor. I had relied upon her absence; and
the misery of that moment, when her eye fell upon me in the very act of
seizing her grandfather, far transcended all else that I have suffered in
these terrific scenes. She fainted in my arms, and I and another carried
her upstairs and procured water. Meantime her grandfather had been
murdered, even while Margaret fainted. I had, however, under the fear of
discovery, though never anticipating a reencounter with herself,
forestalled the explanation requisite in such a case to make my conduct
intelligible. I had told her, under feigned names, the story of my mother
and my sisters. She knew their wrongs: she had heard me contend for
the right of vengeance. Consequently, in our parting interview, one word
only was required to place myself in a new position to her thoughts. I
needed only to say I was that son; that unhappy mother, so miserably
degraded and outraged, was mine.
"As to the jailer, he was met by a party of us. Not suspecting that any of
us could be connected with the family, he was led to talk of the most
hideous details with regard to my poor Berenice. The child had not, as
had been insinuated, aided her own degradation, but had nobly sustained
the dignity of her sex and her family. Such advantages as the monster
pretended to have gained over her--sick, desolate, and latterly delirious--
were, by his own confession, not obtained without violence. This was too
much. Forty thousand lives, had he possessed them, could not have
gratified my thirst for revenge. Yet, had he but showed courage, he
should have died the death of a soldier. But the wretch showed cowardice
the most abject, and--,but you know his fate.
"Now, then, all is finished, and human nature is avenged. Yet, if you
complain of the bloodshed and the terror, think of the wrongs which
created my rights; think of the sacrifice by which I gave a tenfold
strength to those rights; think of the necessity for a dreadful concussion
and shock to society, in order to carry my lesson into the councils of
princes.
"This will now have been effected. And ye, victims of dishonor, will be
glorified in your deaths; ye will not have suffered in vain, nor died without
a monument. Sleep, therefore, sister Berenice--sleep, gentle Mariamne,
in peace. And thou, noble mother, let the outrages sown in thy dishonor,
rise again and blossom in wide harvests of honor for the women of thy
afflicted race. Sleep, daughters of Jerusalem, in the sanctity of your
sufferings. And thou, if it be possible, even more beloved daughter of a
Christian fold, whose company was too soon denied to him in life, open
thy grave to receive HIM, who, in the hour of death, wishes to remember
no title which he wore on earth but that of thy chosen and adoring lover