She had reminded him of what was quite true; he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.
Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those women — mostly mothers — who, having once made up their minds, will not rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make scenes.
This last consideration moved him.
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask; but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory, I will do the impossible — your son shall be transferred to the Guards. Here is my hand on it.
Are you satisfied?"
"My dear benefactor!
This is what I expected from you — I knew your kindness!"
He turned to go.
"Wait — just a word!
When he has been transferred to the Guards..." she faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov... recommend Boris to him as adjutant!
Then I shall be at rest, and then..."
Prince Vasili smiled.
"No, I won't promise that.
You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since his appointment as Commander in Chief.
He told me himself that all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants."
"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "we shall be late."
"Well, au revoir! Good-by!
You hear her?"
"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"
"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went, with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all the old feminine arts.
But as soon as the prince had gone her face resumed its former cold, artificial expression.
She returned to the group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave.
Her task was accomplished.
"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?" asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the nations?
Adorable!
It is enough to make one's head whirl!
It is as if the whole world had gone crazy."
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic smile.
"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine when he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Dio mi l'ha dato.
Guai a chi la tocchi!'" * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run over," Anna Pavlovna continued.
"The sovereigns will not be able to endure this man who is a menace to everything."
