

      “What sort of girl is Miss Darcy?”

      He shook his head. “I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me
      pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her
      brother—very, very proud. As a child, she was affectionate and
      pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and
      hours to her amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a
      handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand,
      highly accomplished. Since her father’s death, her home has been
      London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her
      education.”

      After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth
      could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying:

      “I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr.
      Bingley, who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe,
      truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man? How can they
      suit each other? Do you know Mr. Bingley?”

      “Not at all.”

      “He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know
      what Mr. Darcy is.”

      “Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does
      not want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he
      thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at all his equals
      in consequence, he is a very different man from what he is to the
      less prosperous. His pride never deserts him; but with the rich
      he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and
      perhaps agreeable—allowing something for fortune and figure.”

      The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered
      round the other table and Mr. Collins took his station between
      his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual enquiries as to
      his success were made by the latter. It had not been very great;
      he had lost every point; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express
      her concern thereupon, he assured her with much earnest gravity
      that it was not of the least importance, that he considered the
      money as a mere trifle, and begged that she would not make
      herself uneasy.

      “I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down
      to a card-table, they must take their chances of these things,
      and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five
      shillings any object. There are undoubtedly many who could not
      say the same, but thanks to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I am
      removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters.”

      Mr. Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Mr.
      Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice
      whether her relation was very intimately acquainted with the
      family of de Bourgh.

      “Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given
      him a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced
      to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”

      “You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne
      Darcy were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present
      Mr. Darcy.”

      “No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’s
      connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before
      yesterday.”

      “Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune,
      and it is believed that she and her cousin will unite the two
      estates.”

      This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor
      Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and
      useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself,
      if he were already self-destined for another.

      “Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine
      and her daughter; but from some particulars that he has related
      of her ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that
      in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant,
      conceited woman.”

      “I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I
      have not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I
      never liked her, and that her manners were dictatorial and
      insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and
      clever; but I rather believe she derives part of her abilities
      from her rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner,
      and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who chooses that
      everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the
      first class.”

      Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of
      it, and they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction
      till supper put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies
      their share of Mr. Wickham’s attentions. There could be no
      conversation in the noise of Mrs. Phillips’s supper party, but
      his manners recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said, was
      said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully. Elizabeth went
      away with her head full of him. She could think of nothing but of
      Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but
      there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went,
      for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia talked
      incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
      fish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of
      Mr. and Mrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least
      regard his losses at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper,
      and repeatedly fearing that he crowded his cousins, had more to
      say than he could well manage before the carriage stopped at
      Longbourn House.




Chapter 17

      Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between
      Mr. Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and
      concern; she knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so
      unworthy of Mr. Bingley’s regard; and yet, it was not in her
      nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable
      appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having endured such
      unkindness, was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and
      nothing remained therefore to be done, but to think well of them
      both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account
      of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.

      “They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some
      way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people
      have perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short,
      impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which
      may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.”

      “Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to
      say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been
      concerned in the business? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be
      obliged to think ill of somebody.”

      “Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
      opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful
      light it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father’s favourite
      in such a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide
      for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had
      any value for his character, could be capable of it. Can his most
      intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him? Oh! no.”

      “I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley’s being imposed on,
      than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as
      he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without
      ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides,
      there was truth in his looks.”

      “It is difficult indeed—it is distressing. One does not know what
      to think.”

      “I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.”

      But Jane could think with certainty on only one point—that Mr.
      Bingley, if he _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer
      when the affair became public.

      The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
      conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom
      they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give
      their personal invitation for the long-expected ball at
      Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. The two
      ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it
      an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what she had been
      doing with herself since their separation. To the rest of the
      family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much
      as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to
      the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats
      with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
      hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet’s civilities.

      The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to
      every female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as
      given in compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly
      flattered by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself,
      instead of a ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy
      evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions of
      their brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a
      great deal with Mr. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of
      everything in Mr. Darcy’s look and behaviour. The happiness
      anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single
      event, or any particular person, for though they each, like
      Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he
      was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a
      ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her
      family that she had no disinclination for it.

      “While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is
      enough—I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening
      engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself
      one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement
      as desirable for everybody.”

      Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though
      she did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could
      not help asking him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley’s
      invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to
      join in the evening’s amusement; and she was rather surprised to
      find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, and
      was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop,
      or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to dance.

      “I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a
      ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, to
      respectable people, can have any evil tendency; and I am so far
      from objecting to dancing myself, that I shall hope to be
      honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins in the course of
      the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours,
      Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially, a preference
      which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause,
      and not to any disrespect for her.”

      Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully
      proposed being engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and
      to have Mr. Collins instead! her liveliness had never been worse
      timed. There was no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham’s happiness
      and her own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr.
      Collins’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could.
      She was not the better pleased with his gallantry from the idea
      it suggested of something more. It now first struck her, that
      _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being
      mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
      quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible
      visitors. The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed
      his increasing civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent
      attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more
      astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms,
      it was not long before her mother gave her to understand that the
      probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to _her_.
      Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well
      aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any
      reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and till he did,
      it was useless to quarrel about him.

      If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk
      of, the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable
      state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the
      day of the ball, there was such a succession of rain as prevented
      their walking to Meryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news
      could be sought after—the very shoe-roses for Netherfield were
      got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her
      patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of
      her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance
      on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and
      Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.




Chapter 18

      Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and
      looked in vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats
      there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred
      to her. The certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any
      of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed
      her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in
      the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained
      unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might
      be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the
      dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy’s
      pleasure in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though
      this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence
      was pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly
      applied, and who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to
      town on business the day before, and was not yet returned;
      adding, with a significant smile, “I do not imagine his business
      would have called him away just now, if he had not wanted to
      avoid a certain gentleman here.”

      This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was
      caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not
      less answerable for Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise
      had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former
      was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could
      hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite enquiries
      which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attendance,
      forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She was
      resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned
      away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly
      surmount even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality
      provoked her.

      But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every
      prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not
      dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to
      Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon
      able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her
      cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice. The first
      two dances, however, brought a return of distress; they were
      dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,
      apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without
      being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a
      disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment
      of her release from him was ecstasy.

      She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of
      talking of Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked.
      When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and
      was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly
      addressed by Mr. Darcy who took her so much by surprise in his
      application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she
      accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left
      to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to
      console her:

      “I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”

      “Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all!
      To find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not
      wish me such an evil.”

      When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to
      claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a
      whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham
      to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man ten times his
      consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the
      set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being
      allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and reading in her
      neighbours’ looks, their equal amazement in beholding it. They
      stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to
      imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances,
      and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying
      that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige
      him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance. He
      replied, and was again silent. After a pause of some minutes, she
      addressed him a second time with:—“It is _your_ turn to say
      something now, Mr. Darcy. _I_ talked about the dance, and _you_
      ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room, or the
      number of couples.”

      He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say
      should be said.

      “Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by
      I may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public
      ones. But _now_ we may be silent.”

      “Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”

      “Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd
      to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the
      advantage of _some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as
      that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.”

      “Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do
      you imagine that you are gratifying mine?”

      “Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great
      similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,
      taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
      something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
      posterity with all the _éclat_ of a proverb.”

      “This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am
      sure,” said he. “How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend
      to say. _You_ think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.”

      “I must not decide on my own performance.”

      He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone
      down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not
      very often walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and,
      unable to resist the temptation, added, “When you met us there
      the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.”

      The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread
      his features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though
      blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length
      Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said, “Mr. Wickham is
      blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his _making_
      friends—whether he may be equally capable of _retaining_ them, is
      less certain.”

      “He has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship,” replied
      Elizabeth with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to
      suffer from all his life.”

      Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the
      subject. At that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to
      them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the
      room; but on perceiving Mr. Darcy, he stopped with a bow of
      superior courtesy to compliment him on his dancing and his
      partner.

      “I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very
      superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong
      to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair
      partner does not disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this
      pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable
      event, my dear Eliza (glancing at her sister and Bingley) shall
      take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to
      Mr. Darcy:—but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank
      me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young
      lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”

      The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but
      Sir William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him
      forcibly, and his eyes were directed with a very serious
      expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together.
      Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner,
      and said, “Sir William’s interruption has made me forget what we
      were talking of.”

      “I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not
      have interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for
      themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without
      success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

      “What think you of books?” said he, smiling.

      “Books—oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the
      same feelings.”

      “I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at
      least be no want of subject. We may compare our different
      opinions.”

      “No—I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full
      of something else.”

      “The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes—does it?” said
      he, with a look of doubt.

      “Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said, for
      her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon
      afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember
      hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave,
      that your resentment once created was unappeasable. You are very
      cautious, I suppose, as to its _being created?_”

      “I am,” said he, with a firm voice.

      “And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”

      “I hope not.”

      “It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their
      opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first.”

      “May I ask to what these questions tend?”

      “Merely to the illustration of _your_ character,” said she,
      endeavouring to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it
      out.”

      “And what is your success?”

      She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such
      different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”

      “I can readily believe,” answered he gravely, “that reports may
      vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet,
      that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment,
      as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no
      credit on either.”

      “But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
      opportunity.”

      “I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly
      replied. She said no more, and they went down the other dance and
      parted in silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to
      an equal degree, for in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably
      powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and
      directed all his anger against another.

      They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her,
      and with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:

      “So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George
      Wickham! Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking
      me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man quite
      forgot to tell you, among his other communication, that he was
      the son of old Wickham, the late Mr. Darcy’s steward. Let me
      recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit
      confidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy’s using him
      ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has always
      been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated
      Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the
      particulars, but I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the
      least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham
      mentioned, and that though my brother thought that he could not
      well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he
      was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the
      way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing,
      indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you,
      Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but
      really, considering his descent, one could not expect much
      better.”

      “His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the
      same,” said Elizabeth angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him
      of nothing worse than of being the son of Mr. Darcy’s steward,
      and of _that_, I can assure you, he informed me himself.”

      “I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a
      sneer. “Excuse my interference—it was kindly meant.”

      “Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much
      mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as
      this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the
      malice of Mr. Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had
      undertaken to make enquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane
      met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such
      happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was
      satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth
      instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for
      Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else,
      gave way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for
      happiness.

      “I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling
      than her sister’s, “what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But
      perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any
      third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon.”

      “No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing
      satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of
      his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which
      have principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the
      good conduct, the probity, and honour of his friend, and is
      perfectly convinced that Mr. Wickham has deserved much less
      attention from Mr. Darcy than he has received; and I am sorry to
      say by his account as well as his sister’s, Mr. Wickham is by no
      means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very
      imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy’s regard.”

      “Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?”

      “No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”

      “This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am
      satisfied. But what does he say of the living?”

      “He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has
      heard them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it
      was left to him _conditionally_ only.”

      “I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth
      warmly; “but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances
      only. Mr. Bingley’s defense of his friend was a very able one, I
      dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the
      story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall
      venture to still think of both gentlemen as I did before.”

      She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each,
      and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth
      listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which
      Jane entertained of Mr. Bingley’s regard, and said all in her
      power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by
      Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose
      enquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had
      scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them, and told
      her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as
      to make a most important discovery.

      “I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there
      is now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to
      overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who
      does the honours of the house the names of his cousin Miss de
      Bourgh, and of her mother Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these
      sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with,
      perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I
      am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay
      my respects to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will
      excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the
      connection must plead my apology.”

      “You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!”

      “Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it
      earlier. I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s _nephew_. It will
      be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well
      yesterday se’nnight.”

      Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring
      him that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without
      introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment
      to his aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should
      be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong
      to Mr. Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the
      acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her with the determined air
      of following his own inclination, and, when she ceased speaking,
      replied thus:

      “My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world
      in your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of
      your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a
      wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst
      the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me
      leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in
      point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom—provided
      that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time
      maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of
      my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I
      look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by
      your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant
      guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted
      by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a
      young lady like yourself.” And with a low bow he left her to
      attack Mr. Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly
      watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very
      evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and
      though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it
      all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,”
      “Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see
      him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him with
      unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him
      time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr.
      Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and
      Mr. Darcy’s contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length
      of his second speech, and at the end of it he only made him a
      slight bow, and moved another way. Mr. Collins then returned to
      Elizabeth.

      “I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied
      with my reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the
      attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid
      me the compliment of saying that he was so well convinced of Lady
      Catherine’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a
      favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon
      the whole, I am much pleased with him.”

      As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she
      turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr.
      Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her
      observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as
      Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the
      felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she
      felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to
      like Bingley’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly saw
      were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near
      her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper,
      therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which
      placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to
      find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas)
      freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane
      would soon be married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating
      subject, and Mrs. Bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while
      enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such a
      charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from
      them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was
      such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane,
      and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as
      she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her
      younger daughters, as Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them
      in the way of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at
      her time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to
      the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go
      into company more than she liked. It was necessary to make this
      circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it
      is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs. Bennet to
      find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. She
      concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be
      equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing
      there was no chance of it.

      In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her
      mother’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a
      less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she
      could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy,
      who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being
      nonsensical.

      “What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I
      am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged
      to say nothing _he_ may not like to hear.”

      “For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be
      for you to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to
      his friend by so doing!”

      Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her
      mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone.
      Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She
      could not help frequently glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though
      every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was
      not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his
      attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face
      changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
      steady gravity.

      At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady
      Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights
      which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts
      of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not
      long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over,
      singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing
      Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the
      company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did she
      endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain;
      Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting
      was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’s eyes
      were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched
      her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which
      was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving,
      amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she
      might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of
      half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by no means
      fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner
      affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane, to see
      how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley.
      She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of
      derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
      imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his
      interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the
      hint, and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,
      “That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long
      enough. Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”

      Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted;
      and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech,
      was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were
      now applied to.

      “If I,” said Mr. Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to
      sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the
      company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent
      diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a
      clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be
      justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there
      are certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of a
      parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such an
      agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not
      offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the
      time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and
      the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be
      excused from making as comfortable as possible. And I do not
      think it of light importance that he should have attentive and
      conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those
      to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit him of that duty;
      nor could I think well of the man who should omit an occasion of
      testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the
      family.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech,
      which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room.
      Many stared—many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr.
      Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr. Collins
      for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to
      Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young
      man.

      To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement
      to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it
      would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more
      spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley
      and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his
      notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much
      distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That his
      two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an
      opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she
      could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman,
      or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.

      The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was
      teased by Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her
      side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him
      again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did
      she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer to
      introduce him to any young lady in the room. He assured her, that
      as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief
      object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to her and
      that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her
      the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She
      owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often
      joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins’s
      conversation to herself.

      She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy’s further
      notice; though often standing within a very short distance of
      her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She
      felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Mr.
      Wickham, and rejoiced in it.

      The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart,
      and, by a manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their
      carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone,
      which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by
      some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened
      their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently
      impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every
      attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw a
      languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by
      the long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr.
      Bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment,
      and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their
      behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Mr. Bennet,
      in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Mr. Bingley and Jane
      were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and
      talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
      silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was
      too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation
      of “Lord, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.

      When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most
      pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at
      Longbourn, and addressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to
      assure him how happy he would make them by eating a family dinner
      with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal
      invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he readily
      engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her,
      after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the
      next day for a short time.

      Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under
      the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary
      preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes,
      she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in
      the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter
      married to Mr. Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and
      with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the
      least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the
      match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each was
      eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.




Chapter 19

      The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made
      his declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of
      time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following
      Saturday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it
      distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a
      very orderly manner, with all the observances, which he supposed
      a regular part of the business. On finding Mrs. Bennet,
      Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after
      breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:

      “May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter
      Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience
      with her in the course of this morning?”

      Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise,
      Mrs. Bennet answered instantly, “Oh dear!—yes—certainly. I am
      sure Lizzy will be very happy—I am sure she can have no
      objection. Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs.” And, gathering her
      work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out:

      “Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must
      excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not
      hear. I am going away myself.”

      “No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.”
      And upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed
      looks, about to escape, she added: “Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your
      staying and hearing Mr. Collins.”

      Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction—and a moment’s
      consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to
      get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down
      again and tried to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings
      which were divided between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet
      and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins
      began.

      “Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far
      from doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other
      perfections. You would have been less amiable in my eyes had
      there _not_ been this little unwillingness; but allow me to
      assure you, that I have your respected mother’s permission for
      this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse,
      however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my
      attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as
      I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of my
      future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
      subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons
      for marrying—and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with
      the design of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”

      The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run
      away with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that
      she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to
      stop him further, and he continued:

      “My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right
      thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to
      set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am
      convinced that it will add very greatly to my happiness; and
      thirdly—which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it
      is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble
      lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness. Twice has she
      condescended to give me her opinion (unasked too!) on this
      subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left
      Hunsford—between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was
      arranging Miss de Bourgh’s footstool, that she said, ‘Mr.
      Collins, you must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose
      properly, choose a gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_,
      let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high,
      but able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice.
      Find such a woman as soon as you can, bring her to Hunsford, and
      I will visit her.’ Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair
      cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady
      Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my
      power to offer. You will find her manners beyond anything I can
      describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable
      to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
      which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general
      intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my
      views were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own
      neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many amiable
      young women. But the fact is, that being, as I am, to inherit
      this estate after the death of your honoured father (who,
      however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy myself
      without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that
      the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the
      melancholy event takes place—which, however, as I have already
      said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, my
      fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your
      esteem. And now nothing remains for me but to assure you in the
      most animated language of the violence of my affection. To
      fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of
      that nature on your father, since I am well aware that it could
      not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the four
      per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother’s
      decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,
      therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure
      yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when
      we are married.”

      It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.

      “You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made
      no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my
      thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible
      of the honour of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to
      do otherwise than to decline them.”

      “I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave
      of the hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the
      addresses of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he
      first applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is
      repeated a second, or even a third time. I am therefore by no
      means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to
      lead you to the altar ere long.”

      “Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is a rather
      extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am
      not one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are)
      who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of
      being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal.
      You could not make _me_ happy, and I am convinced that I am the
      last woman in the world who could make you so. Nay, were your
      friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she would find
      me in every respect ill qualified for the situation.”

      “Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr.
      Collins very gravely—“but I cannot imagine that her ladyship
      would at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I
      have the honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the very
      highest terms of your modesty, economy, and other amiable
      qualification.”

      “Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You
      must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment
      of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and
      by refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being
      otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the
      delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take
      possession of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any
      self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as
      finally settled.” And rising as she thus spoke, she would have
      quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus addressed her:

      “When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the
      subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than
      you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of
      cruelty at present, because I know it to be the established
      custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application, and
      perhaps you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as
      would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female
      character.”

      “Really, Mr. Collins,” cried Elizabeth with some warmth, “you
      puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to
      you in the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my
      refusal in such a way as to convince you of its being one.”

      “You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that
      your refusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My
      reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to
      me that my hand is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the
      establishment I can offer would be any other than highly
      desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family
      of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are circumstances
      highly in my favour; and you should take it into further
      consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is
      by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be
      made you. Your portion is unhappily so small that it will in all
      likelihood undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable
      qualifications. As I must therefore conclude that you are not
      serious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it
      to your wish of increasing my love by suspense, according to the
      usual practice of elegant females.”

      “I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to
      that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable
      man. I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed
      sincere. I thank you again and again for the honour you have done
      me in your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely
      impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak
      plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant female, intending
      to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking the truth
      from her heart.”

      “You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward
      gallantry; “and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the
      express authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals
      will not fail of being acceptable.”

      To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would
      make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew;
      determined, if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals
      as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose
      negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive, and
      whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the
      affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.




Chapter 20

      Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
      successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the
      vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw
      Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the
      staircase, than she entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated
      both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their
      nearer connection. Mr. Collins received and returned these
      felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate
      the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he
      trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal
      which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
      from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her
      character.

      This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have
      been glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to
      encourage him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared
      not believe it, and could not help saying so.

      “But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall
      be brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She
      is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own
      interest but I will _make_ her know it.”

      “Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Mr. Collins; “but
      if she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she
      would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my
      situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage
      state. If therefore she actually persists in rejecting my suit,
      perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me,
      because if liable to such defects of temper, she could not
      contribute much to my felicity.”

      “Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed.
      “Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything
      else she is as good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go
      directly to Mr. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with
      her, I am sure.”

      She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to
      her husband, called out as she entered the library, “Oh! Mr.
      Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You
      must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will
      not have him, and if you do not make haste he will change his
      mind and not have _her_.”

      Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and
      fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the
      least altered by her communication.

      “I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she
      had finished her speech. “Of what are you talking?”

      “Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr.
      Collins, and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have
      Lizzy.”

      “And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless
      business.”

      “Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon
      her marrying him.”

      “Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.”

      Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
      library.

      “Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have
      sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr.
      Collins has made you an offer of marriage. Is it true?” Elizabeth
      replied that it was. “Very well—and this offer of marriage you
      have refused?”

      “I have, sir.”

      “Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon
      your accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?”

      “Yes, or I will never see her again.”

      “An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day
      you must be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will
      never see you again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will
      never see you again if you _do_.”

      Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a
      beginning, but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her
      husband regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively
      disappointed.

      “What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised
      me to _insist_ upon her marrying him.”

      “My dear,” replied her husband, “I have two small favours to
      request. First, that you will allow me the free use of my
      understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room.
      I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be.”

      Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband,
      did Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again
      and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to
      secure Jane in her interest; but Jane, with all possible
      mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with
      real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to
      her attacks. Though her manner varied, however, her determination
      never did.

      Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had
      passed. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what
      motives his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was
      hurt, he suffered in no other way. His regard for her was quite
      imaginary; and the possibility of her deserving her mother’s
      reproach prevented his feeling any regret.

      While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to
      spend the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia,
      who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are
      come, for there is such fun here! What do you think has happened
      this morning? Mr. Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she
      will not have him.”

      Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by
      Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they
      entered the breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she
      likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her
      compassion, and entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to
      comply with the wishes of all her family. “Pray do, my dear Miss
      Lucas,” she added in a melancholy tone, “for nobody is on my
      side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used, nobody feels
      for my poor nerves.”

      Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and
      Elizabeth.

      “Aye, there she comes,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “looking as
      unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were
      at York, provided she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss
      Lizzy—if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer
      of marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at all—and
      I am sure I do not know who is to maintain you when your father
      is dead. _I_ shall not be able to keep you—and so I warn you. I
      have done with you from this very day. I told you in the library,
      you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will
      find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking to
      undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in
      talking to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous
      complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can
      tell what I suffer! But it is always so. Those who do not
      complain are never pitied.”

      Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that
      any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase
      the irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption
      from any of them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who
      entered the room with an air more stately than usual, and on
      perceiving whom, she said to the girls, “Now, I do insist upon
      it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let me and Mr.
      Collins have a little conversation together.”

      Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty
      followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she
      could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mr.
      Collins, whose enquiries after herself and all her family were
      very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself
      with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a
      doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projected conversation: “Oh!
      Mr. Collins!”

      “My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this
      point. Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice
      that marked his displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your
      daughter. Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all;
      the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I
      have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps
      not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had
      my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I have often
      observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the
      blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our
      estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any
      disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my
      pretensions to your daughter’s favour, without having paid
      yourself and Mr. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to
      interpose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be
      objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your
      daughter’s lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to
      error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My
      object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with
      due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my
      _manner_ has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to
      apologise.”




Chapter 21

      The discussion of Mr. Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end,
      and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings
      necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish
      allusions of her mother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_
      feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or
      dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner
      and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to her, and the
      assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself
      were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
      civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all,
      and especially to her friend.

      The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet’s ill-humour or
      ill health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry
      pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his
      visit, but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it.
      He was always to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday he meant
      to stay.

      After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to enquire if Mr.
      Wickham were returned, and to lament over his absence from the
      Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town, and
      attended them to their aunt’s where his regret and vexation, and
      the concern of everybody, was well talked over. To Elizabeth,
      however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his
      absence _had_ been self-imposed.

      “I found,” said he, “as the time drew near that I had better not
      meet Mr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with
      him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear,
      and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself.”

      She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a
      full discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they
      civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer
      walked back with them to Longbourn, and during the walk he
      particularly attended to her. His accompanying them was a double
      advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered to herself, and
      it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her
      father and mother.

      Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet;
      it came from Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of
      elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady’s
      fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister’s countenance
      change as she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some
      particular passages. Jane recollected herself soon, and putting
      the letter away, tried to join with her usual cheerfulness in the
      general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the
      subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no
      sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from
      Jane invited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained
      their own room, Jane, taking out the letter, said:

      “This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me
      a good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time,
      and are on their way to town—and without any intention of coming
      back again. You shall hear what she says.”

      She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the
      information of their having just resolved to follow their brother
      to town directly, and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor
      Street, where Mr. Hurst had a house. The next was in these words:
      “I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in
      Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend; but we
      will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that
      delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may
      lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
      unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that.” To these
      highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the
      insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their
      removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament; it
      was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would
      prevent Mr. Bingley’s being there; and as to the loss of their
      society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to regard it, in
      the enjoyment of his.

      “It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should
      not be able to see your friends before they leave the country.
      But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which
      Miss Bingley looks forward may arrive earlier than she is aware,
      and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends
      will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters? Mr.
      Bingley will not be detained in London by them.”

      “Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
      Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:”

      “When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business
      which took him to London might be concluded in three or four
      days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time
      convinced that when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry
      to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither,
      that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a
      comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are already there for
      the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my dearest friend,
      had any intention of making one of the crowd—but of that I
      despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may
      abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and
      that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling
      the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you.”

      “It is evident by this,” added Jane, “that he comes back no more
      this winter.”

      “It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he
      _should_.”

      “Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own
      master. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage
      which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_.”

      “Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the
      truth, _we_ are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really
      do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance,
      and accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and
      myself is heightened into something still more interesting, from
      the hope we dare entertain of her being hereafter our sister. I
      do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on
      this subject; but I will not leave the country without confiding
      them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My
      brother admires her greatly already; he will have frequent
      opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her
      relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a
      sister’s partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call
      Charles most capable of engaging any woman’s heart. With all
      these circumstances to favour an attachment, and nothing to
      prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging the hope of
      an event which will secure the happiness of so many?”

      “What do you think of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said Jane
      as she finished it. “Is it not clear enough? Does it not
      expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to
      be her sister; that she is perfectly convinced of her brother’s
      indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings
      for him, she means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can
      there be any other opinion on the subject?”

      “Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear
      it?”

      “Most willingly.”

      “You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her
      brother is in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy.
      She follows him to town in hope of keeping him there, and tries
      to persuade you that he does not care about you.”

      Jane shook her head.

      “Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen
      you together can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure,
      cannot. She is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as
      much love in Mr. Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her
      wedding clothes. But the case is this: We are not rich enough or
      grand enough for them; and she is the more anxious to get Miss
      Darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there has been
      _one_ intermarriage, she may have less trouble in achieving a
      second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare
      say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,
      my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss
      Bingley tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is
      in the smallest degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he
      took leave of you on Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to
      persuade him that, instead of being in love with you, he is very
      much in love with her friend.”

      “If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied Jane, “your
      representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know
      the foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully
      deceiving anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that
      she is deceiving herself.”

      “That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea,
      since you will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be
      deceived, by all means. You have now done your duty by her, and
      must fret no longer.”

      “But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
      accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to
      marry elsewhere?”

      “You must decide for yourself,” said Elizabeth; “and if, upon
      mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his
      two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being his
      wife, I advise you by all means to refuse him.”

      “How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling. “You must know
      that though I should be exceedingly grieved at their
      disapprobation, I could not hesitate.”

      “I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot
      consider your situation with much compassion.”

      “But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
      required. A thousand things may arise in six months!”

      The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the
      utmost contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of
      Caroline’s interested wishes, and she could not for a moment
      suppose that those wishes, however openly or artfully spoken,
      could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone.

      She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she
      felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its
      happy effect. Jane’s temper was not desponding, and she was
      gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affection
      sometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to
      Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.

      They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of
      the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s
      conduct; but even this partial communication gave her a great
      deal of concern, and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that
      the ladies should happen to go away just as they were all getting
      so intimate together. After lamenting it, however, at some
      length, she had the consolation that Mr. Bingley would be soon
      down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the conclusion of
      all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had been
      invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two
      full courses.




Chapter 22

      The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again
      during the chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen
      to Mr. Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her.
      “It keeps him in good humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged
      to you than I can express.” Charlotte assured her friend of her
      satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid her for
      the little sacrifice of her time. This was very amiable, but
      Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any
      conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her
      from any return of Mr. Collins’s addresses, by engaging them
      towards herself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances
      were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she would
      have felt almost secure of success if he had not been to leave
      Hertfordshire so very soon. But here she did injustice to the
      fire and independence of his character, for it led him to escape
      out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness,
      and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw himself at her feet. He was
      anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins, from a conviction
      that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to conjecture
      his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known till
      its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost
      secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably
      encouraging, he was comparatively diffident since the adventure
      of Wednesday. His reception, however, was of the most flattering
      kind. Miss Lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked
      towards the house, and instantly set out to meet him accidentally
      in the lane. But little had she dared to hope that so much love
      and eloquence awaited her there.

      In as short a time as Mr. Collins’s long speeches would allow,
      everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both;
      and as they entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name
      the day that was to make him the happiest of men; and though such
      a solicitation must be waived for the present, the lady felt no
      inclination to trifle with his happiness. The stupidity with
      which he was favoured by nature must guard his courtship from any
      charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance; and Miss
      Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested
      desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that establishment
      were gained.

      Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their
      consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr.
      Collins’s present circumstances made it a most eligible match for
      their daughter, to whom they could give little fortune; and his
      prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas
      began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter
      had ever excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was
      likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided opinion,
      that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the
      Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and
      his wife should make their appearance at St. James’s. The whole
      family, in short, were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The
      younger girls formed hopes of _coming out_ a year or two sooner
      than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved
      from their apprehension of Charlotte’s dying an old maid.
      Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her
      point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were in
      general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither
      sensible nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his
      attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would be her
      husband. Without thinking highly either of men or matrimony,
      marriage had always been her object; it was the only provision
      for well-educated young women of small fortune, and however
      uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest
      preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained;
      and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been
      handsome, she felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable
      circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to
      Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she valued beyond that of any
      other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame
      her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings
      must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved to give her
      the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins, when
      he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
      passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of
      course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without
      difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst
      forth in such very direct questions on his return as required
      some ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising
      great self-denial, for he was longing to publish his prosperous
      love.

      As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any
      of the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when
      the ladies moved for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great
      politeness and cordiality, said how happy they should be to see
      him at Longbourn again, whenever his engagements might allow him
      to visit them.

      “My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly
      gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and
      you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon
      as possible.”

      They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means
      wish for so speedy a return, immediately said:

      “But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here,
      my good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the
      risk of offending your patroness.”

      “My dear sir,” replied Mr. Collins, “I am particularly obliged to
      you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not
      taking so material a step without her ladyship’s concurrence.”

      “You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather
      than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by
      your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly
      probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that _we_ shall
      take no offence.”

      “Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
      affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily
      receive from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other
      mark of your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my
      fair cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to render
      it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing them health
      and happiness, not excepting my cousin Elizabeth.”

      With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them
      equally surprised that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet
      wished to understand by it that he thought of paying his
      addresses to one of her younger girls, and Mary might have been
      prevailed on to accept him. She rated his abilities much higher
      than any of the others; there was a solidity in his reflections
      which often struck her, and though by no means so clever as
      herself, she thought that if encouraged to read and improve
      himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very
      agreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of
      this kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast,
      and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of
      the day before.

      The possibility of Mr. Collins’s fancying himself in love with
      her friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or
      two; but that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far
      from possibility as she could encourage him herself, and her
      astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first
      the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out:

      “Engaged to Mr. Collins! My dear Charlotte—impossible!”

      The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling
      her story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so
      direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected,
      she soon regained her composure, and calmly replied:

      “Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it
      incredible that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s
      good opinion, because he was not so happy as to succeed with
      you?”

      But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong
      effort for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that
      the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her,
      and that she wished her all imaginable happiness.

      “I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte. “You must be
      surprised, very much surprised—so lately as Mr. Collins was
      wishing to marry you. But when you have had time to think it
      over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am
      not romantic, you know; I never was. I ask only a comfortable
      home; and considering Mr. Collins’s character, connection, and
      situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness
      with him is as fair as most people can boast on entering the
      marriage state.”

      Elizabeth quietly answered “Undoubtedly;” and after an awkward
      pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not
      stay much longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what
      she had heard. It was a long time before she became at all
      reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match. The strangeness
      of Mr. Collins’s making two offers of marriage within three days
      was nothing in comparison of his being now accepted. She had
      always felt that Charlotte’s opinion of matrimony was not exactly
      like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possible that,
      when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better
      feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins
      was a most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend
      disgracing herself and sunk in her esteem, was added the
      distressing conviction that it was impossible for that friend to
      be tolerably happy in the lot she had chosen.




Chapter 23

      Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on
      what she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to
      mention it, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his
      daughter, to announce her engagement to the family. With many
      compliments to them, and much self-gratulation on the prospect of
      a connection between the houses, he unfolded the matter—to an
      audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet,
      with more perseverance than politeness, protested he must be
      entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil,
      boisterously exclaimed:

      “Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not
      you know that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”

      Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
      without anger such treatment; but Sir William’s good breeding
      carried him through it all; and though he begged leave to be
      positive as to the truth of his information, he listened to all
      their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.

      Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so
      unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his
      account, by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte
      herself; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her
      mother and sisters by the earnestness of her congratulations to
      Sir William, in which she was readily joined by Jane, and by
      making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be
      expected from the match, the excellent character of Mr. Collins,
      and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.

      Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal
      while Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than
      her feelings found a rapid vent. In the first place, she
      persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter; secondly, she
      was very sure that Mr. Collins had been taken in; thirdly, she
      trusted that they would never be happy together; and fourthly,
      that the match might be broken off. Two inferences, however, were
      plainly deduced from the whole: one, that Elizabeth was the real
      cause of the mischief; and the other that she herself had been
      barbarously misused by them all; and on these two points she
      principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
      console and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out
      her resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth
      without scolding her, a month passed away before she could speak
      to Sir William or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months
      were gone before she could at all forgive their daughter.

      Mr. Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion,
      and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most
      agreeable sort; for it gratified him, he said, to discover that
      Charlotte Lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably
      sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his
      daughter!

      Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she
      said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for
      their happiness; nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it
      as improbable. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas,
      for Mr. Collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no
      other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton.

      Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to
      retort on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well
      married; and she called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to
      say how happy she was, though Mrs. Bennet’s sour looks and
      ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness
      away.

      Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept
      them mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded
      that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again.
      Her disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard
      to her sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her
      opinion could never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew
      daily more anxious, as Bingley had now been gone a week and
      nothing more was heard of his return.

      Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was
      counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again.
      The promised letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on
      Tuesday, addressed to their father, and written with all the
      solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth’s abode in the family
      might have prompted. After discharging his conscience on that
      head, he proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous
      expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection of
      their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it
      was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been
      so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at
      Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday
      fortnight; for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his
      marriage, that she wished it to take place as soon as possible,
      which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his
      amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making him the
      happiest of men.

      Mr. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
      pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much
      disposed to complain of it as her husband. It was very strange
      that he should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it
      was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. She hated
      having visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent,
      and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable. Such were
      the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they gave way only to the
      greater distress of Mr. Bingley’s continued absence.

      Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day
      after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him
      than the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming
      no more to Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly
      incensed Mrs. Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as
      a most scandalous falsehood.

      Even Elizabeth began to fear—not that Bingley was indifferent—but
      that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away.
      Unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane’s
      happiness, and so dishonorable to the stability of her lover, she
      could not prevent its frequently occurring. The united efforts of
      his two unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend,
      assisted by the attractions of Miss Darcy and the amusements of
      London might be too much, she feared, for the strength of his
      attachment.

      As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course,
      more painful than Elizabeth’s, but whatever she felt she was
      desirous of concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth,
      therefore, the subject was never alluded to. But as no such
      delicacy restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which
      she did not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his
      arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he did not come
      back she would think herself very ill used. It needed all Jane’s
      steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
      tranquillity.

      Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his
      reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been
      on his first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need
      much attention; and luckily for the others, the business of
      love-making relieved them from a great deal of his company. The
      chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, and he
      sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology
      for his absence before the family went to bed.

      Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention
      of anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of
      ill-humour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it
      talked of. The sight of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her
      successor in that house, she regarded her with jealous
      abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded
      her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever she
      spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that they were
      talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
      and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were
      dead. She complained bitterly of all this to her husband.

      “Indeed, Mr. Bennet,” said she, “it is very hard to think that
      Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that _I_
      should be forced to make way for _her_, and live to see her take
      her place in it!”

      “My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope
      for better things. Let us flatter ourselves that _I_ may be the
      survivor.”

      This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore,
      instead of making any answer, she went on as before.

      “I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If
      it was not for the entail, I should not mind it.”

      “What should not you mind?”

      “I should not mind anything at all.”

      “Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
      insensibility.”

      “I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the
      entail. How anyone could have the conscience to entail away an
      estate from one’s own daughters, I cannot understand; and all for
      the sake of Mr. Collins too! Why should _he_ have it more than
      anybody else?”

      “I leave it to yourself to determine,” said Mr. Bennet.




Chapter 24

      Miss Bingley’s letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very
      first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled
      in London for the winter, and concluded with her brother’s regret
      at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in
      Hertfordshire before he left the country.

      Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the
      rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed
      affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss
      Darcy’s praise occupied the chief of it. Her many attractions
      were again dwelt on, and Caroline boasted joyfully of their
      increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment
      of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter. She
      wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an inmate
      of Mr. Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of
      the latter with regard to new furniture.

      Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all
      this, heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided
      between concern for her sister, and resentment against all
      others. To Caroline’s assertion of her brother’s being partial to
      Miss Darcy she paid no credit. That he was really fond of Jane,
      she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had
      always been disposed to like him, she could not think without
      anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that
      want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his
      designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happiness
      to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness,
      however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to
      sport with it in whatever manner he thought best, but her
      sister’s was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible
      himself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be
      long indulged, and must be unavailing. She could think of nothing
      else; and yet whether Bingley’s regard had really died away, or
      were suppressed by his friends’ interference; whether he had been
      aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had escaped his
      observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him
      must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s
      situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded.

      A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her
      feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet’s leaving them
      together, after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield
      and its master, she could not help saying:

      “Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can
      have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual
      reflections on him. But I will not repine. It cannot last long.
      He will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before.”

      Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but
      said nothing.

      “You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you have
      no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
      acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or
      fear, and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not
      _that_ pain. A little time, therefore—I shall certainly try to
      get the better.”

      With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort
      immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on
      my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself.”

      “My dear Jane!” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your
      sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know
      what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or
      loved you as you deserve.”

      Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw
      back the praise on her sister’s warm affection.

      “Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all
      the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody.
      _I_ only want to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself
      against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my
      encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need
      not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of
      whom I think well. The more I see of the world, the more am I
      dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the
      inconsistency of all human characters, and of the little
      dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or
      sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not
      mention; the other is Charlotte’s marriage. It is unaccountable!
      In every view it is unaccountable!”

      “My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They
      will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for
      difference of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins’s
      respectability, and Charlotte’s steady, prudent character.
      Remember that she is one of a large family; that as to fortune,
      it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for
      everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like regard and
      esteem for our cousin.”

      “To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no
      one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I
      persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only
      think worse of her understanding than I now do of her heart. My
      dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded,
      silly man; you know he is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as
      well as I do, that the woman who married him cannot have a proper
      way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte
      Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the
      meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
      yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility
      of danger security for happiness.”

      “I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,”
      replied Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing
      them happy together. But enough of this. You alluded to something
      else. You mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you,
      but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that
      person_ to blame, and saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must
      not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured. We must
      not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and
      circumspect. It is very often nothing but our own vanity that
      deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than it does.”

      “And men take care that they should.”

      “If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have
      no idea of there being so much design in the world as some
      persons imagine.”

      “I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley’s conduct to
      design,” said Elizabeth; “but without scheming to do wrong, or to
      make others unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery.
      Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people’s feelings,
      and want of resolution, will do the business.”

      “And do you impute it to either of those?”

      “Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by
      saying what I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you
      can.”

      “You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?”

      “Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”

      “I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They
      can only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no
      other woman can secure it.”

      “Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides
      his happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and
      consequence; they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the
      importance of money, great connections, and pride.”

      “Beyond a doubt, they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied
      Jane; “but this may be from better feelings than you are
      supposing. They have known her much longer than they have known
      me; no wonder if they love her better. But, whatever may be their
      own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their
      brother’s. What sister would think herself at liberty to do it,
      unless there were something very objectionable? If they believed
      him attached to me, they would not try to part us; if he were so,
      they could not succeed. By supposing such an affection, you make
      everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do
      not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been
      mistaken—or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison
      of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let
      me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be
      understood.”

      Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr.
      Bingley’s name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.

      Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning
      no more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did
      not account for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever
      considering it with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to
      convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his
      attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and
      transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no more; but
      though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time,
      she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet’s best
      comfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.

      Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he
      one day, “your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate
      her. Next to being married, a girl likes to be crossed a little
      in love now and then. It is something to think of, and it gives
      her a sort of distinction among her companions. When is your turn
      to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is
      your time. Here are officers enough in Meryton to disappoint all
      the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham be your man. He is a
      pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”

      “Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We
      must not all expect Jane’s good fortune.”

      “True,” said Mr. Bennet, “but it is a comfort to think that
      whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate
      mother who will make the most of it.”

      Mr. Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the
      gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of
      the Longbourn family. They saw him often, and to his other
      recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The
      whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr.
      Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly
      acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to
      know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they had
      known anything of the matter.

      Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might
      be any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the
      society of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always
      pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes—but
      by everybody else Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.




Chapter 25

      After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of
      felicity, Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by
      the arrival of Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might
      be alleviated on his side, by preparations for the reception of
      his bride; as he had reason to hope, that shortly after his
      return into Hertfordshire, the day would be fixed that was to
      make him the happiest of men. He took leave of his relations at
      Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his fair
      cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
      another letter of thanks.

      On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of
      receiving her brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend
      the Christmas at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible,
      gentlemanlike man, greatly superior to his sister, as well by
      nature as education. The Netherfield ladies would have had
      difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade, and within
      view of his own warehouses, could have been so well-bred and
      agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than Mrs.
      Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
      woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces.
      Between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a
      particular regard. They had frequently been staying with her in
      town.

      The first part of Mrs. Gardiner’s business on her arrival was to
      distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When
      this was done she had a less active part to play. It became her
      turn to listen. Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and
      much to complain of. They had all been very ill-used since she
      last saw her sister. Two of her girls had been upon the point of
      marriage, and after all there was nothing in it.

      “I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got
      Mr. Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard
      to think that she might have been Mr. Collins’s wife by this
      time, had it not been for her own perverseness. He made her an
      offer in this very room, and she refused him. The consequence of
      it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I
      have, and that the Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as
      ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed, sister. They are
      all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of them, but so
      it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in
      my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
      before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is
      the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you
      tell us, of long sleeves.”

      Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given
      before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with
      her, made her sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her
      nieces, turned the conversation.

      When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the
      subject. “It seems likely to have been a desirable match for
      Jane,” said she. “I am sorry it went off. But these things happen
      so often! A young man, such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so
      easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and when
      accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these sort
      of inconsistencies are very frequent.”

      “An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth, “but it
      will not do for _us_. We do not suffer by accident. It does not
      often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a
      young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom
      he was violently in love with only a few days before.”

      “But that expression of ‘violently in love’ is so hackneyed, so
      doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is
      as often applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour’s
      acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent
      was_ Mr. Bingley’s love?”

      “I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite
      inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every
      time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own
      ball he offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to
      dance; and I spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an
      answer. Could there be finer symptoms? Is not general incivility
      the very essence of love?”

      “Oh, yes!—of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt.
      Poor Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she
      may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to
      _you_, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner.
      But do you think she would be prevailed upon to go back with us?
      Change of scene might be of service—and perhaps a little relief
      from home may be as useful as anything.”

      Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt
      persuaded of her sister’s ready acquiescence.

      “I hope,” added Mrs. Gardiner, “that no consideration with regard
      to this young man will influence her. We live in so different a
      part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you
      well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable that
      they should meet at all, unless he really comes to see her.”

      “And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of
      his friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on
      Jane in such a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think
      of it? Mr. Darcy may perhaps have _heard_ of such a place as
      Gracechurch Street, but he would hardly think a month’s ablution
      enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter
      it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley never stirs without him.”

      “So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does
      not Jane correspond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to
      help calling.”

      “She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”

      But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to
      place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of
      Bingley’s being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude
      on the subject which convinced her, on examination, that she did
      not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes
      she thought it probable, that his affection might be reanimated,
      and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the
      more natural influence of Jane’s attractions.

      Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the
      Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than
      as she hoped by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her
      brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without
      any danger of seeing him.

      The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the
      Phillipses, the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day
      without its engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for
      the entertainment of her brother and sister, that they did not
      once sit down to a family dinner. When the engagement was for
      home, some of the officers always made part of it—of which
      officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions,
      Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’s warm
      commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing
      them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their
      preference of each other was plain enough to make her a little
      uneasy; and she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject
      before she left Hertfordshire, and represent to her the
      imprudence of encouraging such an attachment.

      To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
      unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years
      ago, before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in
      that very part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had,
      therefore, many acquaintances in common; and though Wickham had
      been little there since the death of Darcy’s father, it was yet
      in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former
      friends than she had been in the way of procuring.

      Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
      character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible
      subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley
      with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in
      bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late
      possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being made
      acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy’s treatment of him, she
      tried to remember some of that gentleman’s reputed disposition
      when quite a lad which might agree with it, and was confident at
      last that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy
      formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.




Chapter 26

      Mrs. Gardiner’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly
      given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her
      alone; after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went
      on:

      “You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely
      because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not
      afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your
      guard. Do not involve yourself or endeavour to involve him in an
      affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent.
      I have nothing to say against _him_; he is a most interesting
      young man; and if he had the fortune he ought to have, I should
      think you could not do better. But as it is, you must not let
      your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect
      you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
      good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.”

      “My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”

      “Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.”

      “Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of
      myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me,
      if I can prevent it.”

      “Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”

      “I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love
      with Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all
      comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw—and if he becomes
      really attached to me—I believe it will be better that he should
      not. I see the imprudence of it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy!
      My father’s opinion of me does me the greatest honour, and I
      should be miserable to forfeit it. My father, however, is partial
      to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to
      be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see every
      day that where there is affection, young people are seldom
      withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into
      engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than
      so many of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even
      to know that it would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise
      you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry
      to believe myself his first object. When I am in company with
      him, I will not be wishing. In short, I will do my best.”

      “Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so
      very often. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of
      inviting him.”

      “As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth with a conscious smile:
      “very true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do
      not imagine that he is always here so often. It is on your
      account that he has been so frequently invited this week. You
      know my mother’s ideas as to the necessity of constant company
      for her friends. But really, and upon my honour, I will try to do
      what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied.”

      Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked
      her for the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful
      instance of advice being given on such a point, without being
      resented.

      Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been
      quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode
      with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs.
      Bennet. His marriage was now fast approaching, and she was at
      length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even
      repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she “_wished_
      they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the wedding day, and on
      Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose
      to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s ungracious and
      reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself,
      accompanied her out of the room. As they went downstairs
      together, Charlotte said:

      “I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.”

      “_That_ you certainly shall.”

      “And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?”

      “We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.”

      “I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me,
      therefore, to come to Hunsford.”

      Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in
      the visit.

      “My father and Maria are coming to me in March,” added Charlotte,
      “and I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza,
      you will be as welcome as either of them.”

      The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent
      from the church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to
      hear, on the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her
      friend; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as
      it had ever been; that it should be equally unreserved was
      impossible. Elizabeth could never address her without feeling
      that all the comfort of intimacy was over, and though determined
      not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the sake of what
      had been, rather than what was. Charlotte’s first letters were
      received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be
      curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she
      would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce
      herself to be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt
      that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she
      might have foreseen. She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with
      comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could not praise. The
      house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all to her
      taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was most friendly and
      obliging. It was Mr. Collins’s picture of Hunsford and Rosings
      rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
      for her own visit there to know the rest.

      Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce
      their safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth
      hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.

      Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as
      impatience generally is. Jane had been a week in town without
      either seeing or hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it,
      however, by supposing that her last letter to her friend from
      Longbourn had by some accident been lost.

      “My aunt,” she continued, “is going to-morrow into that part of
      the town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in
      Grosvenor Street.”

      She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss
      Bingley. “I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words,
      “but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving
      her no notice of my coming to London. I was right, therefore, my
      last letter had never reached her. I enquired after their
      brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged with Mr.
      Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy
      was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit was not
      long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I
      shall see them soon here.”

      Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that
      accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister’s being in
      town.

      Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She
      endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it; but
      she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After
      waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing
      every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last
      appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more, the
      alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no
      longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister
      will prove what she felt.

      “My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in
      her better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to
      have been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley’s regard for me. But,
      my dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not
      think me obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her
      behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I
      do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate
      with me; but if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am
      sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit
      till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the
      meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that she had no
      pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not
      calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and
      was in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went
      away I was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no
      longer. I pity, though I cannot help blaming her. She was very
      wrong in singling me out as she did; I can safely say that every
      advance to intimacy began on her side. But I pity her, because
      she must feel that she has been acting wrong, and because I am
      very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it. I need
      not explain myself farther; and though _we_ know this anxiety to
      be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily account
      for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to his
      sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural
      and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such
      fears now, because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have
      met, long ago. He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from
      something she said herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner
      of talking, as if she wanted to persuade herself that he is
      really partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot understand it. If I were
      not afraid of judging harshly, I should be almost tempted to say
      that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this. But I
      will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of
      what will make me happy—your affection, and the invariable
      kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very
      soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to
      Netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not with any
      certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely glad that
      you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford.
      Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I am sure you
      will be very comfortable there.—Yours, etc.”

      This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as
      she considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister
      at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely
      over. She would not even wish for a renewal of his attentions.
      His character sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment for
      him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped
      he might really soon marry Mr. Darcy’s sister, as by Wickham’s
      account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown
      away.

      Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise
      concerning that gentleman, and required information; and
      Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to
      her aunt than to herself. His apparent partiality had subsided,
      his attentions were over, he was the admirer of some one else.
      Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it
      and write of it without material pain. Her heart had been but
      slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing
      that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted
      it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
      remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering
      himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in
      this case than in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his
      wish of independence. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more
      natural; and while able to suppose that it cost him a few
      struggles to relinquish her, she was ready to allow it a wise and
      desirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish him
      happy.

      All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating
      the circumstances, she thus went on: “I am now convinced, my dear
      aunt, that I have never been much in love; for had I really
      experienced that pure and elevating passion, I should at present
      detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my
      feelings are not only cordial towards _him_; they are even
      impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find out that I hate her at
      all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good
      sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My watchfulness
      has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a more
      interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in
      love with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative
      insignificance. Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly.
      Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do.
      They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the
      mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something
      to live on as well as the plain.”




Chapter 27

      With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and
      otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton,
      sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did January and February pass
      away. March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at
      first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she
      soon found, was depending on the plan and she gradually learned
      to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater
      certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing Charlotte
      again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There was novelty
      in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
      uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little
      change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would
      moreover give her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew
      near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything,
      however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to
      Charlotte’s first sketch. She was to accompany Sir William and
      his second daughter. The improvement of spending a night in
      London was added in time, and the plan became perfect as plan
      could be.

      The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss
      her, and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her
      going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to
      answer her letter.

      The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly
      friendly; on his side even more. His present pursuit could not
      make him forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and
      to deserve his attention, the first to listen and to pity, the
      first to be admired; and in his manner of bidding her adieu,
      wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to
      expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their opinion of
      her—their opinion of everybody—would always coincide, there was a
      solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to
      him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced
      that, whether married or single, he must always be her model of
      the amiable and pleasing.

      Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her
      think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter
      Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had
      nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to
      with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth
      loved absurdities, but she had known Sir William’s too long. He
      could tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and
      knighthood; and his civilities were worn out, like his
      information.

      It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so
      early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to
      Mr. Gardiner’s door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching
      their arrival; when they entered the passage she was there to
      welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was
      pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs
      were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their
      cousin’s appearance would not allow them to wait in the
      drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a
      twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
      kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in
      bustle and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

      Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object
      was her sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear,
      in reply to her minute enquiries, that though Jane always
      struggled to support her spirits, there were periods of
      dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would
      not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the particulars also of
      Miss Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated
      conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
      herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given
      up the acquaintance.

      Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, and
      complimented her on bearing it so well.

      “But my dear Elizabeth,” she added, “what sort of girl is Miss
      King? I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”

      “Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial
      affairs, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does
      discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid
      of his marrying me, because it would be imprudent; and now,
      because he is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds,
      you want to find out that he is mercenary.”

      “If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall
      know what to think.”

      “She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of
      her.”

      “But he paid her not the smallest attention till her
      grandfather’s death made her mistress of this fortune.”

      “No—why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_
      affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be
      for making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was
      equally poor?”

      “But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions
      towards her so soon after this event.”

      “A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those
      elegant decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does
      not object to it, why should _we_?”

      “_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her
      being deficient in something herself—sense or feeling.”

      “Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. _He_ shall be
      mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.”

      “No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry,
      you know, to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in
      Derbyshire.”

      “Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who
      live in Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in
      Hertfordshire are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank
      Heaven! I am going to-morrow where I shall find a man who has not
      one agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor sense to
      recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after
      all.”

      “Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of
      disappointment.”

      Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had
      the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle
      and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the
      summer.

      “We have not determined how far it shall carry us,” said Mrs.
      Gardiner, “but, perhaps, to the Lakes.”

      No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
      acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “Oh, my
      dear, dear aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! what
      felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to
      disappointment and spleen. What are young men to rocks and
      mountains? Oh! what hours of transport we shall spend! And when
      we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
      being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We _will_ know
      where we have gone—we _will_ recollect what we have seen. Lakes,
      mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our
      imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular
      scene, will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let
      _our_ first effusions be less insupportable than those of the
      generality of travellers.”




Chapter 28

      Every object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting to
      Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she
      had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her
      health, and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant
      source of delight.

      When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye
      was in search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to
      bring it in view. The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary
      on one side. Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she
      had heard of its inhabitants.

      At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to
      the road, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the
      laurel hedge, everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins
      and Charlotte appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at
      the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the house,
      amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment they
      were all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the sight of each other.
      Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure, and
      Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming when she found
      herself so affectionately received. She saw instantly that her
      cousin’s manners were not altered by his marriage; his formal
      civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some
      minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his enquiries after all
      her family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing
      out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as
      soon as they were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time,
      with ostentatious formality to his humble abode, and punctually
      repeated all his wife’s offers of refreshment.

      Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not
      help in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the
      room, its aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself
      particularly to her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had
      lost in refusing him. But though everything seemed neat and
      comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of
      repentance, and rather looked with wonder at her friend that she
      could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mr.
      Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be
      ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily
      turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a
      faint blush; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After
      sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the
      room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of
      their journey, and of all that had happened in London, Mr.
      Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was
      large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he
      attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his most
      respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of
      countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of
      the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as much as possible.
      Here, leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and
      scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked
      for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left
      beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields in every
      direction, and could tell how many trees there were in the most
      distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which
      the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with
      the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that
      bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was
      a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.

      From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two
      meadows; but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the
      remains of a white frost, turned back; and while Sir William
      accompanied him, Charlotte took her sister and friend over the
      house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity
      of showing it without her husband’s help. It was rather small,
      but well built and convenient; and everything was fitted up and
      arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave
      Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be forgotten,
      there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by
      Charlotte’s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must
      be often forgotten.

      She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the
      country. It was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when
      Mr. Collins joining in, observed:

      “Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady
      Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need
      not say you will be delighted with her. She is all affability and
      condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some
      portion of her notice when service is over. I have scarcely any
      hesitation in saying she will include you and my sister Maria in
      every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here.
      Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We dine at
      Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her
      ladyship’s carriage is regularly ordered for us. I _should_ say,
      one of her ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”

      “Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed,”
      added Charlotte, “and a most attentive neighbour.”

      “Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort
      of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.”

      The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news,
      and telling again what had already been written; and when it
      closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to
      meditate upon Charlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand
      her address in guiding, and composure in bearing with, her
      husband, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. She
      had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenor
      of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of Mr.
      Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings. A
      lively imagination soon settled it all.

      About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting
      ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole
      house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard
      somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly
      after her. She opened the door and met Maria in the landing
      place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out—

      “Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the
      dining-room, for there is such a sight to be seen! I will not
      tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment.”

      Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing
      more, and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the
      lane, in quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a
      low phaeton at the garden gate.

      “And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. “I expected at least that the
      pigs were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady
      Catherine and her daughter.”

      “La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is
      not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives
      with them; the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is
      quite a little creature. Who would have thought that she could be
      so thin and small?”

      “She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all
      this wind. Why does she not come in?”

      “Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of
      favours when Miss de Bourgh comes in.”

      “I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas.
      “She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well.
      She will make him a very proper wife.”

      Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in
      conversation with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth’s
      high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest
      contemplation of the greatness before him, and constantly bowing
      whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that way.

      At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on,
      and the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw
      the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good
      fortune, which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the
      whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day.




Chapter 29

      Mr. Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was
      complete. The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness
      to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility
      towards himself and his wife, was exactly what he had wished for;
      and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was
      such an instance of Lady Catherine’s condescension, as he knew
      not how to admire enough.

      “I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all
      surprised by her ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and
      spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my
      knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. But who could
      have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined
      that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an
      invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately
      after your arrival!”

      “I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir
      William, “from that knowledge of what the manners of the great
      really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire.
      About the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not
      uncommon.”

      Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but
      their visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing
      them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms,
      so many servants, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly
      overpower them.

      When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to
      Elizabeth—

      “Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel.
      Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us
      which becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely
      to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest—there
      is no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think
      the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the
      distinction of rank preserved.”

      While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their
      different doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady
      Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner.
      Such formidable accounts of her ladyship, and her manner of
      living, quite frightened Maria Lucas who had been little used to
      company, and she looked forward to her introduction at Rosings
      with as much apprehension as her father had done to his
      presentation at St. James’s.

      As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a
      mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its
      prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she
      could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene
      to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of
      the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the
      glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.

      When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every
      moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly
      calm. Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing
      of Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary
      talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money
      or rank she thought she could witness without trepidation.

      From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a
      rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments,
      they followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room
      where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were
      sitting. Her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive
      them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it with her husband that
      the office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a
      proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which he
      would have thought necessary.

      In spite of having been at St. James’s, Sir William was so
      completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but
      just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat
      without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of
      her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way
      to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and
      could observe the three ladies before her composedly. Lady
      Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features,
      which might once have been handsome. Her air was not
      conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to
      make her visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not
      rendered formidable by silence; but whatever she said was spoken
      in so authoritative a tone, as marked her self-importance, and
      brought Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth’s mind; and from the
      observation of the day altogether, she believed Lady Catherine to
      be exactly what he represented.

      When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and
      deportment she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she
      turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in
      Maria’s astonishment at her being so thin and so small. There was
      neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies. Miss
      de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her features, though not plain,
      were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low
      voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing
      remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she
      said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before her
      eyes.

      After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the
      windows to admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point
      out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that
      it was much better worth looking at in the summer.

      The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the
      servants and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had
      promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at
      the bottom of the table, by her ladyship’s desire, and looked as
      if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He carved,
      and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was
      commended, first by him and then by Sir William, who was now
      enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a
      manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But
      Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration,
      and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the
      table proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply much
      conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an
      opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de
      Bourgh—the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady
      Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all dinner-time.
      Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss
      de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing
      she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question,
      and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.

      When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to
      be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without
      any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on
      every subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not
      used to have her judgement controverted. She enquired into
      Charlotte’s domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a
      great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her
      how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as
      hers, and instructed her as to the care of her cows and her
      poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great
      lady’s attention, which could furnish her with an occasion of
      dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs.
      Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
      Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she
      knew the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very
      genteel, pretty kind of girl. She asked her, at different times,
      how many sisters she had, whether they were older or younger than
      herself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether
      they were handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage
      her father kept, and what had been her mother’s maiden name?
      Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions but answered
      them very composedly. Lady Catherine then observed,

      “Your father’s estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For
      your sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise
      I see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It
      was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. Do you
      play and sing, Miss Bennet?”

      “A little.”

      “Oh! then—some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our
      instrument is a capital one, probably superior to——You shall try
      it some day. Do your sisters play and sing?”

      “One of them does.”

      “Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The
      Miss Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income
      as yours. Do you draw?”

      “No, not at all.”

      “What, none of you?”

      “Not one.”

      “That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your
      mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit
      of masters.”

      “My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates
      London.”

      “Has your governess left you?”

      “We never had any governess.”

      “No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up
      at home without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your
      mother must have been quite a slave to your education.”

      Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had
      not been the case.

      “Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess,
      you must have been neglected.”

      “Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us
      as wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always
      encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary.
      Those who chose to be idle, certainly might.”

      “Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if
      I had known your mother, I should have advised her most
      strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing is to be
      done in education without steady and regular instruction, and
      nobody but a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many
      families I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am
      always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces of
      Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means;
      and it was but the other day that I recommended another young
      person, who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the
      family are quite delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you
      of Lady Metcalf’s calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss
      Pope a treasure. ‘Lady Catherine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a
      treasure.’ Are any of your younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?”

      “Yes, ma’am, all.”

      “All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the
      second. The younger ones out before the elder ones are married!
      Your younger sisters must be very young?”

      “Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to
      be much in company. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very
      hard upon younger sisters, that they should not have their share
      of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the
      means or inclination to marry early. The last-born has as good a
      right to the pleasures of youth as the first. And to be kept back
      on _such_ a motive! I think it would not be very likely to
      promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”

      “Upon my word,” said her ladyship, “you give your opinion very
      decidedly for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”

      “With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth,
      smiling, “your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”

      Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct
      answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature
      who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.

      “You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need
      not conceal your age.”

      “I am not one-and-twenty.”

      When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the
      card-tables were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and
      Mrs. Collins sat down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose
      to play at cassino, the two girls had the honour of assisting
      Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her party. Their table was
      superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did
      not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson expressed her
      fears of Miss de Bourgh’s being too hot or too cold, or having
      too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the
      other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking—stating the
      mistakes of the three others, or relating some anecdote of
      herself. Mr. Collins was employed in agreeing to everything her
      ladyship said, thanking her for every fish he won, and
      apologising if he thought he won too many. Sir William did not
      say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble
      names.

      When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they
      chose, the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to
      Mrs. Collins, gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The
      party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine
      determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From
      these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the
      coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr. Collins’s
      side and as many bows on Sir William’s they departed. As soon as
      they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her
      cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings,
      which, for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it
      really was. But her commendation, though costing her some
      trouble, could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very
      soon obliged to take her ladyship’s praise into his own hands.




Chapter 30

      Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was
      long enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most
      comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband and
      such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Sir William
      was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his morning to driving him out
      in his gig, and showing him the country; but when he went away,
      the whole family returned to their usual employments, and
      Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
      cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between
      breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the
      garden or in reading and writing, and looking out of the window
      in his own book-room, which fronted the road. The room in which
      the ladies sat was backwards. Elizabeth had at first rather
      wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining-parlour for
      common use; it was a better sized room, and had a more pleasant
      aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason
      for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been
      much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally
      lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.

      From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane,
      and were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what
      carriages went along, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh
      drove by in her phaeton, which he never failed coming to inform
      them of, though it happened almost every day. She not
      unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes’
      conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed upon
      to get out.

      Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to
      Rosings, and not many in which his wife did not think it
      necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollected that
      there might be other family livings to be disposed of, she could
      not understand the sacrifice of so many hours. Now and then they
      were honoured with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escaped
      her observation that was passing in the room during these visits.
      She examined into their employments, looked at their work, and
      advised them to do it differently; found fault with the
      arrangement of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in
      negligence; and if she accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it
      only for the sake of finding out that Mrs. Collins’s joints of
      meat were too large for her family.

      Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in
      the commission of the peace of the county, she was a most active
      magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were
      carried to her by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers
      were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she
      sallied forth into the village to settle their differences,
      silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty.

      The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a
      week; and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being
      only one card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was
      the counterpart of the first. Their other engagements were few,
      as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was beyond
      Mr. Collins’s reach. This, however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and
      upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough; there were
      half-hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the
      weather was so fine for the time of year that she had often great
      enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she
      frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine,
      was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where
      there was a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but
      herself, and where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s
      curiosity.

      In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed
      away. Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to
      bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a
      circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard soon after her
      arrival that Mr. Darcy was expected there in the course of a few
      weeks, and though there were not many of her acquaintances whom
      she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively
      new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might be amused
      in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him were, by his
      behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by
      Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
      satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration,
      and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been
      frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself.

      His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was
      walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into
      Hunsford Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and
      after making his bow as the carriage turned into the Park,
      hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following
      morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were
      two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had
      brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his
      uncle Lord ——, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when
      Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte
      had seen them from her husband’s room, crossing the road, and
      immediately running into the other, told the girls what an honour
      they might expect, adding:

      “I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy
      would never have come so soon to wait upon me.”

      Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the
      compliment, before their approach was announced by the door-bell,
      and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room.
      Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not
      handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman. Mr.
      Darcy looked just as he had been used to look in
      Hertfordshire—paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to
      Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward her
      friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth
      merely curtseyed to him without saying a word.

      Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the
      readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very
      pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight
      observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some
      time without speaking to anybody. At length, however, his
      civility was so far awakened as to enquire of Elizabeth after the
      health of her family. She answered him in the usual way, and
      after a moment’s pause, added:

      “My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you
      never happened to see her there?”

      She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to
      see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed
      between the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little
      confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to
      meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no farther, and the
      gentlemen soon afterwards went away.




Chapter 31

      Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners were very much admired at the
      Parsonage, and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably
      to the pleasures of their engagements at Rosings. It was some
      days, however, before they received any invitation thither—for
      while there were visitors in the house, they could not be
      necessary; and it was not till Easter-day, almost a week after
      the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured by such an
      attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
      come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very
      little of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had
      called at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr.
      Darcy they had seen only at church.

      The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they
      joined the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Her ladyship
      received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by
      no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she
      was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them,
      especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the
      room.

      Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was
      a welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins’s pretty
      friend had moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated
      himself by her, and talked so agreeably of Kent and
      Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books
      and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained
      in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and
      flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as well
      as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
      towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship,
      after a while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged,
      for she did not scruple to call out:

      “What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are
      talking of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it
      is.”

      “We are speaking of music, madam,” said he, when no longer able
      to avoid a reply.

      “Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my
      delight. I must have my share in the conversation if you are
      speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose,
      who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a better
      natural taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great
      proficient. And so would Anne, if her health had allowed her to
      apply. I am confident that she would have performed delightfully.
      How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”

      Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s
      proficiency.

      “I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said Lady
      Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to
      excel if she does not practice a good deal.”

      “I assure you, madam,” he replied, “that she does not need such
      advice. She practises very constantly.”

      “So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next
      write to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any
      account. I often tell young ladies that no excellence in music is
      to be acquired without constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet
      several times, that she will never play really well unless she
      practises more; and though Mrs. Collins has no instrument, she is
      very welcome, as I have often told her, to come to Rosings every
      day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson’s room. She
      would be in nobody’s way, you know, in that part of the house.”

      Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s ill-breeding, and
      made no answer.

      When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of
      having promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the
      instrument. He drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to
      half a song, and then talked, as before, to her other nephew;
      till the latter walked away from her, and making with his usual
      deliberation towards the pianoforte stationed himself so as to
      command a full view of the fair performer’s countenance.
      Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first convenient
      pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:

      “You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state
      to hear me? I will not be alarmed though your sister _does_ play
      so well. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to
      be frightened at the will of others. My courage always rises at
      every attempt to intimidate me.”

      “I shall not say you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you
      could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming
      you; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough
      to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing
      opinions which in fact are not your own.”

      Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said
      to Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty
      notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am
      particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose
      my real character, in a part of the world where I had hoped to
      pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it
      is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my
      disadvantage in Hertfordshire—and, give me leave to say, very
      impolitic too—for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such
      things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.”

      “I am not afraid of you,” said he, smilingly.

      “Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,” cried Colonel
      Fitzwilliam. “I should like to know how he behaves among
      strangers.”

      “You shall hear then—but prepare yourself for something very
      dreadful. The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire,
      you must know, was at a ball—and at this ball, what do you think
      he did? He danced only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce;
      and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lady was
      sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the
      fact.”

      “I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the
      assembly beyond my own party.”

      “True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well,
      Colonel Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your
      orders.”

      “Perhaps,” said Darcy, “I should have judged better, had I sought
      an introduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to
      strangers.”

      “Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth,
      still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall we ask him why a man
      of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is ill
      qualified to recommend himself to strangers?”

      “I can answer your question,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying
      to him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”

      “I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said
      Darcy, “of conversing easily with those I have never seen before.
      I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested
      in their concerns, as I often see done.”

      “My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument
      in the masterly manner which I see so many women’s do. They have
      not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same
      expression. But then I have always supposed it to be my own
      fault—because I will not take the trouble of practising. It is
      not that I do not believe _my_ fingers as capable as any other
      woman’s of superior execution.”

      Darcy smiled and said, “You are perfectly right. You have
      employed your time much better. No one admitted to the privilege
      of hearing you can think anything wanting. We neither of us
      perform to strangers.”

      Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to
      know what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began
      playing again. Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening
      for a few minutes, said to Darcy:

      “Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more,
      and could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very
      good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to
      Anne’s. Anne would have been a delightful performer, had her
      health allowed her to learn.”

      Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his
      cousin’s praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other
      could she discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his
      behaviour to Miss de Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss
      Bingley, that he might have been just as likely to marry _her_,
      had she been his relation.

      Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance,
      mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste.
      Elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility,
      and, at the request of the gentlemen, remained at the instrument
      till her ladyship’s carriage was ready to take them all home.




Chapter 32

      Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to
      Jane while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the
      village, when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain
      signal of a visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it
      not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension
      was putting away her half-finished letter that she might escape
      all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and, to her very
      great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.

      He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for
      his intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the
      ladies were to be within.

      They then sat down, and when her enquiries after Rosings were
      made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was
      absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in
      this emergence recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in
      Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on
      the subject of their hasty departure, she observed:

      “How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr.
      Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley
      to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he
      went but the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope,
      when you left London?”

      “Perfectly so, I thank you.”

      She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a
      short pause added:

      “I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of
      ever returning to Netherfield again?”

      “I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may
      spend very little of his time there in the future. He has many
      friends, and is at a time of life when friends and engagements
      are continually increasing.”

      “If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better
      for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely,
      for then we might possibly get a settled family there. But,
      perhaps, Mr. Bingley did not take the house so much for the
      convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must
      expect him to keep it or quit it on the same principle.”

      “I should not be surprised,” said Darcy, “if he were to give it
      up as soon as any eligible purchase offers.”

      Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his
      friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to
      leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.

      He took the hint, and soon began with, “This seems a very
      comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to
      it when Mr. Collins first came to Hunsford.”

      “I believe she did—and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
      kindness on a more grateful object.”

      “Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a
      wife.”

      “Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with
      one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him,
      or have made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent
      understanding—though I am not certain that I consider her
      marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems
      perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light it is
      certainly a very good match for her.”

      “It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a
      distance of her own family and friends.”

      “An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.”

      “And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a
      day’s journey. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.”

      “I should never have considered the distance as one of the
      _advantages_ of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “I should never have
      said Mrs. Collins was settled _near_ her family.”

      “It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything
      beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would
      appear far.”

      As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she
      understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
      Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered:

      “I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near
      her family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on
      many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the
      expenses of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But
      that is not the case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a
      comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent
      journeys—and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself
      _near_ her family under less than _half_ the present distance.”

      Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, “_You_
      cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_
      cannot have been always at Longbourn.”

      Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change
      of feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the
      table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:

      “Are you pleased with Kent?”

      A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either
      side calm and concise—and soon put an end to by the entrance of
      Charlotte and her sister, just returned from her walk. The
      _tête-à-tête_ surprised them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which
      had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a
      few minutes longer without saying much to anybody, went away.

      “What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he
      was gone. “My dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he
      would never have called on us in this familiar way.”

      But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very
      likely, even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and after
      various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to
      proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was
      the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were
      over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a
      billiard-table, but gentlemen cannot always be within doors; and
      in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk
      to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a
      temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day.
      They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
      separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by
      their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam
      came because he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which
      of course recommended him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded
      by her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his
      evident admiration of her, of her former favourite George
      Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was less
      captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners, she
      believed he might have the best informed mind.

      But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more
      difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as he
      frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his
      lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity
      rather than of choice—a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to
      himself. He seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knew
      not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam’s occasionally
      laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was generally
      different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told
      her; and as she would liked to have believed this change the
      effect of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she
      set herself seriously to work to find it out. She watched him
      whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford;
      but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a
      great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It
      was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether
      there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing
      but absence of mind.

      She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of
      his being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the
      idea; and Mrs. Collins did not think it right to press the
      subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only
      end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a
      doubt, that all her friend’s dislike would vanish, if she could
      suppose him to be in her power.

      In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her
      marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most
      pleasant man; he certainly admired her, and his situation in life
      was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr.
      Darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin
      could have none at all.




Chapter 33

      More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,
      unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the
      mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought,
      and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him
      at first that it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could
      occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and
      even a third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary
      penance, for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal
      enquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually
      thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He never
      said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of
      talking or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of
      their third rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected
      questions—about her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of
      solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’s
      happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings and her not perfectly
      understanding the house, he seemed to expect that whenever she
      came into Kent again she would be staying _there_ too. His words
      seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel Fitzwilliam in his
      thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must mean an
      allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed her a
      little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the
      pales opposite the Parsonage.

      She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane’s last
      letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had
      not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by
      Mr. Darcy, she saw on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was
      meeting her. Putting away the letter immediately and forcing a
      smile, she said:

      “I did not know before that you ever walked this way.”

      “I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I
      generally do every year, and intend to close it with a call at
      the Parsonage. Are you going much farther?”

      “No, I should have turned in a moment.”

      And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the
      Parsonage together.

      “Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?” said she.

      “Yes—if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his
      disposal. He arranges the business just as he pleases.”

      “And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at
      least pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know
      anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes
      than Mr. Darcy.”

      “He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel
      Fitzwilliam. “But so we all do. It is only that he has better
      means of having it than many others, because he is rich, and many
      others are poor. I speak feelingly. A younger son, you know, must
      be inured to self-denial and dependence.”

      “In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little
      of either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial
      and dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money
      from going wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a
      fancy for?”

      “These are home questions—and perhaps I cannot say that I have
      experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of
      greater weight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons
      cannot marry where they like.”

      “Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very
      often do.”

      “Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not
      many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some
      attention to money.”

      “Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at
      the idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And
      pray, what is the usual price of an earl’s younger son? Unless
      the elder brother is very sickly, I suppose you would not ask
      above fifty thousand pounds.”

      He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To
      interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with
      what had passed, she soon afterwards said:

      “I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the
      sake of having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not
      marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But,
      perhaps, his sister does as well for the present, and, as she is
      under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her.”

      “No,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantage which he
      must divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of
      Miss Darcy.”

      “Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make?
      Does your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age
      are sometimes a little difficult to manage, and if she has the
      true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way.”

      As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the
      manner in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss
      Darcy likely to give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she
      had somehow or other got pretty near the truth. She directly
      replied:

      “You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I
      dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world.
      She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my
      acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard
      you say that you know them.”

      “I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike
      man—he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”

      “Oh! yes,” said Elizabeth drily; “Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to
      Mr. Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”

      “Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him
      in those points where he most wants care. From something that he
      told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley
      very much indebted to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I
      have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It
      was all conjecture.”

      “What is it you mean?”

      “It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally
      known, because if it were to get round to the lady’s family, it
      would be an unpleasant thing.”

      “You may depend upon my not mentioning it.”

      “And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
      Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated
      himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences
      of a most imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any
      other particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from
      believing him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that
      sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of
      last summer.”

      “Did Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?”

      “I understood that there were some very strong objections against
      the lady.”

      “And what arts did he use to separate them?”

      “He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam,
      smiling. “He only told me what I have now told you.”

      Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
      indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her
      why she was so thoughtful.

      “I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. “Your
      cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the
      judge?”

      “You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?”

      “I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety
      of his friend’s inclination, or why, upon his own judgement
      alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner his friend
      was to be happy. But,” she continued, recollecting herself, “as
      we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him.
      It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the
      case.”

      “That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam, “but it is
      a lessening of the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.”

      This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a
      picture of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an
      answer, and therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked
      on indifferent matters until they reached the Parsonage. There,
      shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she
      could think without interruption of all that she had heard. It
      was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than
      those with whom she was connected. There could not exist in the
      world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have such boundless
      influence. That he had been concerned in the measures taken to
      separate Bingley and Jane she had never doubted; but she had
      always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and
      arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead
      him, _he_ was the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of
      all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had
      ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most
      affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say
      how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.

      “There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were
      Colonel Fitzwilliam’s words; and those strong objections probably
      were, her having one uncle who was a country attorney, and
      another who was in business in London.

      “To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility
      of objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!—her
      understanding excellent, her mind improved, and her manners
      captivating. Neither could anything be urged against my father,
      who, though with some peculiarities, has abilities Mr. Darcy
      himself need not disdain, and respectability which he will
      probably never reach.” When she thought of her mother, her
      confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow that any
      objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose
      pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the
      want of importance in his friend’s connections, than from their
      want of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had
      been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by
      the wish of retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister.

      The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on
      a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that,
      added to her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her
      not to attend her cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to
      drink tea. Mrs. Collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did
      not press her to go and as much as possible prevented her husband
      from pressing her; but Mr. Collins could not conceal his
      apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather displeased by her
      staying at home.




Chapter 34

      When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate
      herself as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her
      employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had
      written to her since her being in Kent. They contained no actual
      complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any
      communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost
      every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which
      had been used to characterise her style, and which, proceeding
      from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly
      disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded.
      Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of
      uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the
      first perusal. Mr. Darcy’s shameful boast of what misery he had
      been able to inflict, gave her a keener sense of her sister’s
      sufferings. It was some consolation to think that his visit to
      Rosings was to end on the day after the next—and, a still
      greater, that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with
      Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her
      spirits, by all that affection could do.

      She could not think of Darcy’s leaving Kent without remembering
      that his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had
      made it clear that he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as
      he was, she did not mean to be unhappy about him.

      While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound
      of the door-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the
      idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once
      before called late in the evening, and might now come to enquire
      particularly after her. But this idea was soon banished, and her
      spirits were very differently affected, when, to her utter
      amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the room. In an hurried
      manner he immediately began an enquiry after her health, imputing
      his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better. She answered
      him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and then
      getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
      said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came
      towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began:

      “In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not
      be repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire
      and love you.”

      Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared,
      coloured, doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient
      encouragement; and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long
      felt for her, immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were
      feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed; and he was
      not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride. His
      sense of her inferiority—of its being a degradation—of the family
      obstacles which had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on
      with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was
      wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his suit.

      In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be
      insensible to the compliment of such a man’s affection, and
      though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at
      first sorry for the pain he was to receive; till, roused to
      resentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in
      anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with
      patience, when he should have done. He concluded with
      representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in
      spite of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer;
      and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her
      acceptance of his hand. As he said this, she could easily see
      that he had no doubt of a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of
      apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance expressed real
      security. Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther, and,
      when he ceased, the colour rose into her cheeks, and she said:

      “In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
      express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
      unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation
      should be felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now
      thank you. But I cannot—I have never desired your good opinion,
      and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry
      to have occasioned pain to anyone. It has been most unconsciously
      done, however, and I hope will be of short duration. The feelings
      which, you tell me, have long prevented the acknowledgment of
      your regard, can have little difficulty in overcoming it after
      this explanation.”

      Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes
      fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less
      resentment than surprise. His complexion became pale with anger,
      and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature. He
      was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not
      open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The
      pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings dreadful. At length, with a
      voice of forced calmness, he said:

      “And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of
      expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so
      little _endeavour_ at civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of
      small importance.”

      “I might as well enquire,” replied she, “why with so evident a
      desire of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that
      you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even
      against your character? Was not this some excuse for incivility,
      if I _was_ uncivil? But I have other provocations. You know I
      have. Had not my feelings decided against you—had they been
      indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you think that
      any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been
      the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most
      beloved sister?”

      As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the
      emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to
      interrupt her while she continued:

      “I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive
      can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You
      dare not, you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if
      not the only means of dividing them from each other—of exposing
      one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, and
      the other to its derision for disappointed hopes, and involving
      them both in misery of the acutest kind.”

      She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was
      listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any
      feeling of remorse. He even looked at her with a smile of
      affected incredulity.

      “Can you deny that you have done it?” she repeated.

      With assumed tranquillity he then replied: “I have no wish of
      denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend
      from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_
      I have been kinder than towards myself.”

      Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil
      reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to
      conciliate her.

      “But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my
      dislike is founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of
      you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which
      I received many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject,
      what can you have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can
      you here defend yourself? or under what misrepresentation can you
      here impose upon others?”

      “You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said
      Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.

      “Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling
      an interest in him?”

      “His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy contemptuously; “yes, his
      misfortunes have been great indeed.”

      “And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth with energy. “You have
      reduced him to his present state of poverty—comparative poverty.
      You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been
      designed for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of
      that independence which was no less his due than his desert. You
      have done all this! and yet you can treat the mention of his
      misfortune with contempt and ridicule.”

      “And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the
      room, “is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you
      hold me! I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults,
      according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,”
      added he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, “these
      offenses might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt
      by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented
      my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might
      have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my
      struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my being impelled
      by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by reflection,
      by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor
      am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and
      just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
      connections?—to congratulate myself on the hope of relations,
      whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?”

      Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she
      tried to the utmost to speak with composure when she said:

      “You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of
      your declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared
      me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you
      behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.”

      She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she
      continued:

      “You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible
      way that would have tempted me to accept it.”

      Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an
      expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on:

      “From the very beginning—from the first moment, I may almost
      say—of my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with
      the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your
      selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form
      the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have
      built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month
      before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I
      could ever be prevailed on to marry.”

      “You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your
      feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have
      been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and
      accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.”

      And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth
      heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house.

      The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how
      to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried
      for half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had
      passed, was increased by every review of it. That she should
      receive an offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have
      been in love with her for so many months! So much in love as to
      wish to marry her in spite of all the objections which had made
      him prevent his friend’s marrying her sister, and which must
      appear at least with equal force in his own case—was almost
      incredible! It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so
      strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride—his
      shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane—his
      unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could not
      justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned
      Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to
      deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his
      attachment had for a moment excited. She continued in very
      agitated reflections till the sound of Lady Catherine’s carriage
      made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte’s
      observation, and hurried her away to her room.




Chapter 35

      Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and
      meditations which had at length closed her eyes. She could not
      yet recover from the surprise of what had happened; it was
      impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for
      employment, she resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge
      herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding directly to her
      favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy’s sometimes
      coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she
      turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. The
      park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon
      passed one of the gates into the ground.

      After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she
      was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the
      gates and look into the park. The five weeks which she had now
      passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country, and
      every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She was
      on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a glimpse of
      a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park; he was
      moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was
      directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now near
      enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness,
      pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself
      called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she
      moved again towards the gate. He had by that time reached it
      also, and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took,
      said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have been walking in
      the grove some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me
      the honour of reading that letter?” And then, with a slight bow,
      turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.

      With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest
      curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still
      increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of
      letter-paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The
      envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way along the
      lane, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight
      o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:—

      “Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the
      apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments
      or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to
      you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling
      myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both,
      cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation
      and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been
      spared, had not my character required it to be written and read.
      You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your
      attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but
      I demand it of your justice.

      “Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of
      equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first
      mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I
      had detached Mr. Bingley from your sister, and the other, that I
      had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and
      humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the
      prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown
      off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my
      father, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on
      our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its
      exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two
      young persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few
      weeks, could bear no comparison. But from the severity of that
      blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each
      circumstance, I shall hope to be in the future secured, when the
      following account of my actions and their motives has been read.
      If, in the explanation of them, which is due to myself, I am
      under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive
      to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be
      obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.

      “I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common
      with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any
      other young woman in the country. But it was not till the evening
      of the dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his
      feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen him in love
      before. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you,
      I was first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas’s accidental
      information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given
      rise to a general expectation of their marriage. He spoke of it
      as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided.
      From that moment I observed my friend’s behaviour attentively;
      and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet was
      beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also
      watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging
      as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I
      remained convinced from the evening’s scrutiny, that though she
      received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by
      any participation of sentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken
      here, _I_ must have been in error. Your superior knowledge of
      your sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have
      been misled by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment
      has not been unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert,
      that the serenity of your sister’s countenance and air was such
      as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that,
      however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily
      touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is
      certain—but I will venture to say that my investigation and
      decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did
      not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed
      it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My
      objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last
      night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion
      to put aside, in my own case; the want of connection could not be
      so great an evil to my friend as to me. But there were other
      causes of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and
      existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself
      endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before
      me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of
      your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in
      comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so
      almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger
      sisters, and occasionally even by your father. Pardon me. It
      pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern for the defects
      of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this
      representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider
      that, to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of
      the like censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and
      your elder sister, than it is honourable to the sense and
      disposition of both. I will only say farther that from what
      passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and
      every inducement heightened which could have led me before, to
      preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy
      connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following,
      as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon
      returning.

      “The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters’
      uneasiness had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence
      of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time
      was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on
      joining him directly in London. We accordingly went—and there I
      readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the
      certain evils of such a choice. I described, and enforced them
      earnestly. But, however this remonstrance might have staggered or
      delayed his determination, I do not suppose that it would
      ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded
      by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s
      indifference. He had before believed her to return his affection
      with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great
      natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than
      on his own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived
      himself, was no very difficult point. To persuade him against
      returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been
      given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself
      for having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct in
      the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it
      is that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to
      conceal from him your sister’s being in town. I knew it myself,
      as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother is even yet
      ignorant of it. That they might have met without ill consequence
      is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to me enough
      extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this
      concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however,
      and it was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more
      to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your
      sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done and though the motives
      which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient,
      I have not yet learnt to condemn them.

      “With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having
      injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you
      the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he has
      _particularly_ accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what
      I shall relate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted
      veracity.

      “Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for
      many years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose
      good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my
      father to be of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was
      his godson, his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My
      father supported him at school, and afterwards at Cambridge—most
      important assistance, as his own father, always poor from the
      extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to give him a
      gentleman’s education. My father was not only fond of this young
      man’s society, whose manners were always engaging; he had also
      the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his
      profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it
      is many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very
      different manner. The vicious propensities—the want of principle,
      which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best
      friend, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly
      the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of seeing
      him in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy could not have. Here
      again I shall give you pain—to what degree you only can tell. But
      whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has created, a
      suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his
      real character—it adds even another motive.

      “My excellent father died about five years ago; and his
      attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his
      will he particularly recommended it to me, to promote his
      advancement in the best manner that his profession might
      allow—and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family
      living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There was also a
      legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not long
      survive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mr.
      Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against
      taking orders, he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for
      him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of
      the preferment, by which he could not be benefited. He had some
      intention, he added, of studying law, and I must be aware that
      the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient
      support therein. I rather wished, than believed him to be
      sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his
      proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman;
      the business was therefore soon settled—he resigned all claim to
      assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be
      in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three
      thousand pounds. All connection between us seemed now dissolved.
      I thought too ill of him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his
      society in town. In town I believe he chiefly lived, but his
      studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all
      restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation. For
      about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of
      the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he
      applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His
      circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in
      believing it, were exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most
      unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being
      ordained, if I would present him to the living in question—of
      which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well
      assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could
      not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions. You will
      hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for
      resisting every repetition to it. His resentment was in
      proportion to the distress of his circumstances—and he was
      doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his
      reproaches to myself. After this period every appearance of
      acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. But last
      summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.

      “I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget
      myself, and which no obligation less than the present should
      induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I
      feel no doubt of your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten
      years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother’s
      nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, she
      was taken from school, and an establishment formed for her in
      London; and last summer she went with the lady who presided over
      it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly
      by design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance
      between him and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most
      unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid, he so far
      recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart
      retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child,
      that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and to consent
      to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her
      excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that
      I owed the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly
      a day or two before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana,
      unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother
      whom she almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole
      to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I acted. Regard for my
      sister’s credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I
      wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Mrs.
      Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr. Wickham’s chief
      object was unquestionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty
      thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of
      revenging himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge
      would have been complete indeed.

      “This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we
      have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject
      it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty
      towards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form
      of falsehood he had imposed on you; but his success is not
      perhaps to be wondered at. Ignorant as you previously were of
      everything concerning either, detection could not be in your
      power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination.

      “You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last
      night; but I was not then master enough of myself to know what
      could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here
      related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of
      Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant
      intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of my father’s
      will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of
      these transactions. If your abhorrence of _me_ should make _my_
      assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause
      from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be the
      possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some
      opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of
      the morning. I will only add, God bless you.

      “FITZWILLIAM DARCY”




Chapter 36

      If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect
      it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no
      expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may
      well be supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a
      contrariety of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read
      were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did she first
      understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and
      steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation
      to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a
      strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his
      account of what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an
      eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension, and from
      impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was
      incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes.
      His belief of her sister’s insensibility she instantly resolved
      to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to
      the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him
      justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which
      satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was
      all pride and insolence.

      But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr.
      Wickham—when she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation
      of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion
      of his worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to his own
      history of himself—her feelings were yet more acutely painful and
      more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and
      even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely,
      repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false! This cannot be! This
      must be the grossest falsehood!”—and when she had gone through
      the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last
      page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
      regard it, that she would never look in it again.

      In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
      nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the
      letter was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she
      could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related
      to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the
      meaning of every sentence. The account of his connection with the
      Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the
      kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though she had not before known
      its extent, agreed equally well with his own words. So far each
      recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the
      difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was
      fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was
      impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side
      or the other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that
      her wishes did not err. But when she read and re-read with the
      closest attention, the particulars immediately following of
      Wickham’s resigning all pretensions to the living, of his
      receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds,
      again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the letter,
      weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
      impartiality—deliberated on the probability of each statement—but
      with little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again
      she read on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair,
      which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could
      so represent as to render Mr. Darcy’s conduct in it less than
      infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely
      blameless throughout the whole.

      The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to
      lay at Mr. Wickham’s charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more
      so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice. She had never
      heard of him before his entrance into the ——shire Militia, in
      which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who, on
      meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight
      acquaintance. Of his former way of life nothing had been known in
      Hertfordshire but what he told himself. As to his real character,
      had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of
      enquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had established him
      at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried to recollect
      some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity
      or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of Mr.
      Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for
      those casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what
      Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’
      continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could
      see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address;
      but she could remember no more substantial good than the general
      approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social
      powers had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point a
      considerable while, she once more continued to read. But, alas!
      the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy, received
      some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel
      Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she
      was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel
      Fitzwilliam himself—from whom she had previously received the
      information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs, and
      whose character she had no reason to question. At one time she
      had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked
      by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly
      banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never have
      hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his
      cousin’s corroboration.

      She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in
      conversation between Wickham and herself, in their first evening
      at Mr. Phillips’s. Many of his expressions were still fresh in
      her memory. She was _now_ struck with the impropriety of such
      communications to a stranger, and wondered it had escaped her
      before. She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he
      had done, and the inconsistency of his professions with his
      conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of
      seeing Mr. Darcy—that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
      _he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield
      ball the very next week. She remembered also that, till the
      Netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told his story
      to no one but herself; but that after their removal it had been
      everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no scruples
      in sinking Mr. Darcy’s character, though he had assured her that
      respect for the father would always prevent his exposing the son.

      How differently did everything now appear in which he was
      concerned! His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence
      of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of
      her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but
      his eagerness to grasp at anything. His behaviour to herself
      could now have had no tolerable motive; he had either been
      deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying his
      vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had
      most incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour
      grew fainter and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr.
      Darcy, she could not but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned
      by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair;
      that proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in
      the whole course of their acquaintance—an acquaintance which had
      latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of
      intimacy with his ways—seen anything that betrayed him to be
      unprincipled or unjust—anything that spoke him of irreligious or
      immoral habits; that among his own connections he was esteemed
      and valued—that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a brother,
      and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
      sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling; that had
      his actions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a
      violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed
      from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of
      it, and such an amiable man as Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible.

      She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor
      Wickham could she think without feeling she had been blind,
      partial, prejudiced, absurd.

      “How despicably I have acted!” she cried; “I, who have prided
      myself on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my
      abilities! who have often disdained the generous candour of my
      sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust!
      How humiliating is this discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation!
      Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind!
      But vanity, not love, has been my folly. Pleased with the
      preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on
      the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
      prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either
      were concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself.”

      From herself to Jane—from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a
      line which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy’s
      explanation _there_ had appeared very insufficient, and she read
      it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal.
      How could she deny that credit to his assertions in one instance,
      which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared
      himself to be totally unsuspicious of her sister’s attachment;
      and she could not help remembering what Charlotte’s opinion had
      always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his
      description of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though
      fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant
      complacency in her air and manner not often united with great
      sensibility.

      When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
      mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her
      sense of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her
      too forcibly for denial, and the circumstances to which he
      particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball,
      and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have
      made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers.

      The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It
      soothed, but it could not console her for the contempt which had
      thus been self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she
      considered that Jane’s disappointment had in fact been the work
      of her nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit
      of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she felt
      depressed beyond anything she had ever known before.

      After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
      variety of thought—re-considering events, determining
      probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to
      a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection
      of her long absence, made her at length return home; and she
      entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual,
      and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make
      her unfit for conversation.

      She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had
      each called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few
      minutes, to take leave—but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been
      sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and
      almost resolving to walk after her till she could be found.
      Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in missing him; she
      really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an
      object; she could think only of her letter.




Chapter 37

      The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins
      having been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting
      obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of
      their appearing in very good health, and in as tolerable spirits
      as could be expected, after the melancholy scene so lately gone
      through at Rosings. To Rosings he then hastened, to console Lady
      Catherine and her daughter; and on his return brought back, with
      great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship, importing that
      she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of having
      them all to dine with her.

      Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that,
      had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to
      her as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of
      what her ladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she
      have said? how would she have behaved?” were questions with which
      she amused herself.

      Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. “I
      assure you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I
      believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I
      am particularly attached to these young men, and know them to be
      so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so
      they always are. The dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably
      till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely,
      more, I think, than last year. His attachment to Rosings
      certainly increases.”

      Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here,
      which were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.

      Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed
      out of spirits, and immediately accounting for it herself, by
      supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she
      added:

      “But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg
      that you may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad
      of your company, I am sure.”

      “I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,”
      replied Elizabeth, “but it is not in my power to accept it. I
      must be in town next Saturday.”

      “Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I
      expected you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before
      you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs.
      Bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight.”

      “But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”

      “Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can.
      Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if
      you will stay another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to
      take one of you as far as London, for I am going there early in
      June, for a week; and as Dawson does not object to the
      barouche-box, there will be very good room for one of you—and
      indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not
      object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.”

      “You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
      original plan.”

      Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Mrs. Collins, you must send a
      servant with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot
      bear the idea of two young women travelling post by themselves.
      It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have
      the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing. Young
      women should always be properly guarded and attended, according
      to their situation in life. When my niece Georgiana went to
      Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her having two
      men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy,
      of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
      propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to
      all those things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs.
      Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would
      really be discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.”

      “My uncle is to send a servant for us.”

      “Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad
      you have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you
      change horses? Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at
      the Bell, you will be attended to.”

      Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their
      journey, and as she did not answer them all herself, attention
      was necessary, which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or,
      with a mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was.
      Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours; whenever she was
      alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day
      went by without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in
      all the delight of unpleasant recollections.

      Mr. Darcy’s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by
      heart. She studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its
      writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the
      style of his address, she was still full of indignation; but when
      she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him,
      her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed
      feelings became the object of compassion. His attachment excited
      gratitude, his general character respect; but she could not
      approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or
      feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own
      past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and
      regret; and in the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of
      yet heavier chagrin. They were hopeless of remedy. Her father,
      contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to
      restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and her
      mother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely
      insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane
      in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia;
      but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence, what
      chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
      irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always
      affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless,
      would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and
      vain. While there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt
      with him; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they
      would be going there forever.

      Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr.
      Darcy’s explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good
      opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His
      affection was proved to have been sincere, and his conduct
      cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness
      of his confidence in his friend. How grievous then was the
      thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so
      replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been
      deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!

      When to these recollections was added the development of
      Wickham’s character, it may be easily believed that the happy
      spirits which had seldom been depressed before, were now so much
      affected as to make it almost impossible for her to appear
      tolerably cheerful.

      Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last
      week of her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening
      was spent there; and her ladyship again enquired minutely into
      the particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the
      best method of packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of
      placing gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought herself
      obliged, on her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and
      pack her trunk afresh.

      When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension,
      wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford
      again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to
      curtsey and hold out her hand to both.




Chapter 38

      On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a
      few minutes before the others appeared; and he took the
      opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed
      indispensably necessary.

      “I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether Mrs. Collins has
      yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I
      am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving
      her thanks for it. The favour of your company has been much felt,
      I assure you. We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our
      humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms and few
      domestics, and the little we see of the world, must make Hunsford
      extremely dull to a young lady like yourself; but I hope you will
      believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done
      everything in our power to prevent your spending your time
      unpleasantly.”

      Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness.
      She had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of
      being with Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received,
      must make _her_ feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and
      with a more smiling solemnity replied:

      “It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your
      time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most
      fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very
      superior society, and, from our connection with Rosings, the
      frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may
      flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have been
      entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine’s
      family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing
      which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see
      how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge
      that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I
      should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion,
      while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.”

      Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he
      was obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to
      unite civility and truth in a few short sentences.

      “You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
      Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you
      will be able to do so. Lady Catherine’s great attentions to Mrs.
      Collins you have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust
      it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate—but
      on this point it will be as well to be silent. Only let me assure
      you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most
      cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. My dear Charlotte
      and I have but one mind and one way of thinking. There is in
      everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas
      between us. We seem to have been designed for each other.”

      Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where
      that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she
      firmly believed and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was
      not sorry, however, to have the recital of them interrupted by
      the lady from whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy
      to leave her to such society! But she had chosen it with her eyes
      open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to
      go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her
      housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent
      concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

      At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the
      parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After
      an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was
      attended to the carriage by Mr. Collins, and as they walked down
      the garden he was commissioning her with his best respects to all
      her family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had
      received at Longbourn in the winter, and his compliments to Mr.
      and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her in, Maria
      followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when he
      suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
      hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at
      Rosings.

      “But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble
      respects delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their
      kindness to you while you have been here.”

      Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be
      shut, and the carriage drove off.

      “Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it
      seems but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many
      things have happened!”

      “A great many indeed,” said her companion with a sigh.

      “We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there
      twice! How much I shall have to tell!”

      Elizabeth added privately, “And how much I shall have to
      conceal!”

      Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any
      alarm; and within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they
      reached Mr. Gardiner’s house, where they were to remain a few
      days.

      Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of
      studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements which the
      kindness of her aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go
      home with her, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for
      observation.

      It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even
      for Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy’s
      proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would
      so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so
      highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been
      able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing
      could have conquered but the state of indecision in which she
      remained as to the extent of what she should communicate; and her
      fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
      repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister
      further.




Chapter 39

      It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies
      set out together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ——, in
      Hertfordshire; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr.
      Bennet’s carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in
      token of the coachman’s punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking
      out of a dining-room up stairs. These two girls had been above an
      hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite
      milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and dressing a salad
      and cucumber.

      After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a
      table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually
      affords, exclaiming, “Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable
      surprise?”

      “And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia, “but you must lend
      us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.”
      Then, showing her purchases—“Look here, I have bought this
      bonnet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might
      as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get
      home, and see if I can make it up any better.”

      And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect
      unconcern, “Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the
      shop; and when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim
      it with fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it
      will not much signify what one wears this summer, after the
      ——shire have left Meryton, and they are going in a fortnight.”

      “Are they indeed!” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest
      satisfaction.

      “They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want
      papa to take us all there for the summer! It would be such a
      delicious scheme; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at
      all. Mamma would like to go too of all things! Only think what a
      miserable summer else we shall have!”

      “Yes,” thought Elizabeth, “_that_ would be a delightful scheme
      indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton,
      and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset
      already by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of
      Meryton!”

      “Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down
      at table. “What do you think? It is excellent news—capital
      news—and about a certain person we all like!”

      Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told
      he need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:

      “Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You
      thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he
      often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is
      an ugly fellow! I am glad he is gone. I never saw such a long
      chin in my life. Well, but now for my news; it is about dear
      Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not? There is no danger
      of Wickham’s marrying Mary King. There’s for you! She is gone
      down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”

      “And Mary King is safe!” added Elizabeth; “safe from a connection
      imprudent as to fortune.”

      “She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.”

      “But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,” said
      Jane.

      “I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never
      cared three straws about her—who _could_ about such a nasty
      little freckled thing?”

      Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
      coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the
      _sentiment_ was little other than her own breast had harboured
      and fancied liberal!

      As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
      ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all
      their boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition
      of Kitty’s and Lydia’s purchases, were seated in it.

      “How nicely we are all crammed in,” cried Lydia. “I am glad I
      bought my bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another
      bandbox! Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk
      and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear
      what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen
      any pleasant men? Have you had any flirting? I was in great hopes
      that one of you would have got a husband before you came back.
      Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. She is almost
      three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not being
      married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to
      get husbands, you can’t think. She says Lizzy had better have
      taken Mr. Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any
      fun in it. Lord! how I should like to be married before any of
      you; and then I would _chaperon_ you about to all the balls. Dear
      me! we had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel
      Forster’s. Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Mrs.
      Forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by the
      bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so she asked
      the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was
      forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
      dressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes on purpose to pass for
      a lady, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel
      and Mrs. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were
      forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how
      well he looked! When Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or
      three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the
      least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs. Forster. I thought I
      should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect something, and
      then they soon found out what was the matter.”

      With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did
      Lydia, assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to
      amuse her companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened
      as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent
      mention of Wickham’s name.

      Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to
      see Jane in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner
      did Mr. Bennet say voluntarily to Elizabeth:

      “I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”

      Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the
      Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were
      the subjects that occupied them: Lady Lucas was enquiring of
      Maria, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs.
      Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of
      the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and,
      on the other, retailing them all to the younger Lucases; and
      Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person’s, was
      enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who
      would hear her.

      “Oh! Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had
      such fun! As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and
      pretended there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone
      so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to
      the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated
      the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and
      if you would have gone, we would have treated you too. And then
      when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have
      got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we
      were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud,
      that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!”

      To this Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear
      sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be
      congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they
      would have no charms for _me_—I should infinitely prefer a book.”

      But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to
      anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary
      at all.

      In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to
      walk to Meryton, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth
      steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss
      Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in
      pursuit of the officers. There was another reason too for her
      opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr. Wickham again, and was
      resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to _her_ of
      the regiment’s approaching removal was indeed beyond expression.
      In a fortnight they were to go—and once gone, she hoped there
      could be nothing more to plague her on his account.

      She had not been many hours at home before she found that the
      Brighton scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn,
      was under frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw
      directly that her father had not the smallest intention of
      yielding; but his answers were at the same time so vague and
      equivocal, that her mother, though often disheartened, had never
      yet despaired of succeeding at last.




Chapter 40

      Elizabeth’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened
      could no longer be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress
      every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing
      her to be surprised, she related to her the next morning the
      chief of the scene between Mr. Darcy and herself.

      Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong
      sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear
      perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other
      feelings. She was sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his
      sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend them; but
      still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister’s
      refusal must have given him.

      “His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said she, “and
      certainly ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it
      must increase his disappointment!”

      “Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry for him; but he
      has other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his
      regard for me. You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?”

      “Blame you! Oh, no.”

      “But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?”

      “No—I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.”

      “But you _will_ know it, when I tell you what happened the very
      next day.”

      She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents
      as far as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this
      for poor Jane! who would willingly have gone through the world
      without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole
      race of mankind, as was here collected in one individual. Nor was
      Darcy’s vindication, though grateful to her feelings, capable of
      consoling her for such discovery. Most earnestly did she labour
      to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear the one
      without involving the other.

      “This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to
      make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you
      must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of
      merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and
      of late it has been shifting about pretty much. For my part, I am
      inclined to believe it all Darcy’s; but you shall do as you
      choose.”

      It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from
      Jane.

      “I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham
      so very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! Dear
      Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered. Such a
      disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too!
      and having to relate such a thing of his sister! It is really too
      distressing. I am sure you must feel it so.”

      “Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you
      so full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that
      I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your
      profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him much
      longer, my heart will be as light as a feather.”

      “Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his
      countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner!”

      “There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of
      those two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other
      all the appearance of it.”

      “I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it
      as you used to do.”

      “And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a
      dislike to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one’s
      genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind.
      One may be continually abusive without saying anything just; but
      one cannot always be laughing at a man without now and then
      stumbling on something witty.”

      “Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not
      treat the matter as you do now.”

      “Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say
      unhappy. And with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane
      to comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak and vain
      and nonsensical as I knew I had! Oh! how I wanted you!”

      “How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong
      expressions in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they
      _do_ appear wholly undeserved.”

      “Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a
      most natural consequence of the prejudices I had been
      encouraging. There is one point on which I want your advice. I
      want to be told whether I ought, or ought not, to make our
      acquaintances in general understand Wickham’s character.”

      Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can
      be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your
      opinion?”

      “That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorised
      me to make his communication public. On the contrary, every
      particular relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as
      possible to myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to
      the rest of his conduct, who will believe me? The general
      prejudice against Mr. Darcy is so violent, that it would be the
      death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt to place him
      in an amiable light. I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon be
      gone; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what he
      really is. Some time hence it will be all found out, and then we
      may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At present
      I will say nothing about it.”

      “You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin
      him for ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and
      anxious to re-establish a character. We must not make him
      desperate.”

      The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this conversation.
      She had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her
      for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane,
      whenever she might wish to talk again of either. But there was
      still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the
      disclosure. She dared not relate the other half of Mr. Darcy’s
      letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been
      valued by her friend. Here was knowledge in which no one could
      partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect
      understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing
      off this last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if
      that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely
      be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable
      manner himself. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till
      it has lost all its value!”

      She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the
      real state of her sister’s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still
      cherished a very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even
      fancied herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth of
      first attachment, and, from her age and disposition, greater
      steadiness than most first attachments often boast; and so
      fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to every
      other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the
      feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence
      of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own health
      and their tranquillity.

      “Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Bennet one day, “what is your opinion
      _now_ of this sad business of Jane’s? For my part, I am
      determined never to speak of it again to anybody. I told my
      sister Phillips so the other day. But I cannot find out that Jane
      saw anything of him in London. Well, he is a very undeserving
      young man—and I do not suppose there’s the least chance in the
      world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his coming
      to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have enquired of
      everybody, too, who is likely to know.”

      “I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”

      “Oh well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come.
      Though I shall always say he used my daughter extremely ill; and
      if I was her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort
      is, I am sure Jane will die of a broken heart; and then he will
      be sorry for what he has done.”

      But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such
      expectation, she made no answer.

      “Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the
      Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope
      it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is
      an excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her
      mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in
      _their_ housekeeping, I dare say.”

      “No, nothing at all.”

      “A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes.
      _They_ will take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will
      never be distressed for money. Well, much good may it do them!
      And so, I suppose, they often talk of having Longbourn when your
      father is dead. They look upon it as quite their own, I dare say,
      whenever that happens.”

      “It was a subject which they could not mention before me.”

      “No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt
      they often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be
      easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the
      better. _I_ should be ashamed of having one that was only
      entailed on me.”




Chapter 41

      The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began.
      It was the last of the regiment’s stay in Meryton, and all the
      young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The
      dejection was almost universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were
      still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course
      of their employments. Very frequently were they reproached for
      this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was
      extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in
      any of the family.

      “Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?” would
      they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. “How can you be
      smiling so, Lizzy?”

      Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered
      what she had herself endured on a similar occasion,
      five-and-twenty years ago.

      “I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when
      Colonel Miller’s regiment went away. I thought I should have
      broken my heart.”

      “I am sure I shall break _mine_,” said Lydia.

      “If one could but go to Brighton!” observed Mrs. Bennet.

      “Oh, yes!—if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so
      disagreeable.”

      “A little sea-bathing would set me up forever.”

      “And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of
      good,” added Kitty.

      Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
      Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all
      sense of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of
      Mr. Darcy’s objections; and never had she been so much disposed
      to pardon his interference in the views of his friend.

      But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for
      she received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the
      colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This
      invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very lately
      married. A resemblance in good humour and good spirits had
      recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of their _three_
      months’ acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.

      The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs.
      Forster, the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of
      Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to her
      sister’s feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless
      ecstasy, calling for everyone’s congratulations, and laughing and
      talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty
      continued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as
      unreasonable as her accent was peevish.

      “I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as
      Lydia,” said she, “Though I am _not_ her particular friend. I
      have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more too, for
      I am two years older.”

      In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to
      make her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was
      so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother
      and Lydia, that she considered it as the death warrant of all
      possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as
      such a step must make her were it known, she could not help
      secretly advising her father not to let her go. She represented
      to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s general behaviour, the
      little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a
      woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
      imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the
      temptations must be greater than at home. He heard her
      attentively, and then said:

      “Lydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some
      public place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with
      so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the
      present circumstances.”

      “If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great
      disadvantage to us all which must arise from the public notice of
      Lydia’s unguarded and imprudent manner—nay, which has already
      arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the
      affair.”

      “Already arisen?” repeated Mr. Bennet. “What, has she frightened
      away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast
      down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a
      little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the
      list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s
      folly.”

      “Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It
      is not of particular, but of general evils, which I am now
      complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world must
      be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of
      all restraint which mark Lydia’s character. Excuse me, for I must
      speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble
      of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her
      present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will
      soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character will be
      fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
      that ever made herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in
      the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any
      attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, from the
      ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off
      any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for
      admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty also is
      comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,
      ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father,
      can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and
      despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will not
      be often involved in the disgrace?”

      Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject, and
      affectionately taking her hand said in reply:

      “Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are
      known you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear
      to less advantage for having a couple of—or I may say, three—very
      silly sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does
      not go to Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a
      sensible man, and will keep her out of any real mischief; and she
      is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody. At
      Brighton she will be of less importance even as a common flirt
      than she has been here. The officers will find women better worth
      their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may
      teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow
      many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the
      rest of her life.”

      With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own
      opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and
      sorry. It was not in her nature, however, to increase her
      vexations by dwelling on them. She was confident of having
      performed her duty, and to fret over unavoidable evils, or
      augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.

      Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference
      with her father, their indignation would hardly have found
      expression in their united volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a
      visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly
      happiness. She saw, with the creative eye of fancy, the streets
      of that gay bathing-place covered with officers. She saw herself
      the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them at present
      unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp—its tents stretched
      forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
      and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the
      view, she saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting
      with at least six officers at once.

      Had she known her sister sought to tear her from such prospects
      and such realities as these, what would have been her sensations?
      They could have been understood only by her mother, who might
      have felt nearly the same. Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that
      consoled her for her melancholy conviction of her husband’s never
      intending to go there himself.

      But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their
      raptures continued, with little intermission, to the very day of
      Lydia’s leaving home.

      Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having
      been frequently in company with him since her return, agitation
      was pretty well over; the agitations of former partiality
      entirely so. She had even learnt to detect, in the very
      gentleness which had first delighted her, an affectation and a
      sameness to disgust and weary. In his present behaviour to
      herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure, for the
      inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which
      had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve,
      after what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern
      for him in finding herself thus selected as the object of such
      idle and frivolous gallantry; and while she steadily repressed
      it, could not but feel the reproof contained in his believing,
      that however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions had
      been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified, and her preference
      secured at any time by their renewal.

      On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining at Meryton, he
      dined, with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little
      was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good humour, that on
      his making some enquiry as to the manner in which her time had
      passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr.
      Darcy’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him,
      if he was acquainted with the former.

      He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment’s
      recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly
      seen him often; and, after observing that he was a very
      gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him. Her answer
      was warmly in his favour. With an air of indifference he soon
      afterwards added:

      “How long did you say he was at Rosings?”

      “Nearly three weeks.”

      “And you saw him frequently?”

      “Yes, almost every day.”

      “His manners are very different from his cousin’s.”

      “Yes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy improves upon
      acquaintance.”

      “Indeed!” cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her.
      “And pray, may I ask?—” But checking himself, he added, in a
      gayer tone, “Is it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to
      add aught of civility to his ordinary style?—for I dare not
      hope,” he continued in a lower and more serious tone, “that he is
      improved in essentials.”

      “Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. “In essentials, I believe, he is very
      much what he ever was.”

      While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
      rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a
      something in her countenance which made him listen with an
      apprehensive and anxious attention, while she added:

      “When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean
      that his mind or his manners were in a state of improvement, but
      that, from knowing him better, his disposition was better
      understood.”

      Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and
      agitated look; for a few minutes he was silent, till, shaking off
      his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the
      gentlest of accents:

      “You, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily
      comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to
      assume even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that
      direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many others,
      for it must only deter him from such foul misconduct as I have
      suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which
      you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his
      visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgement he stands
      much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I know, when
      they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish
      of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain
      he has very much at heart.”

      Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered
      only by a slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted
      to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was
      in no humour to indulge him. The rest of the evening passed with
      the _appearance_, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no
      further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last
      with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never
      meeting again.

      When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to
      Meryton, from whence they were to set out early the next morning.
      The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than
      pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep
      from vexation and envy. Mrs. Bennet was diffuse in her good
      wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive in her
      injunctions that she should not miss the opportunity of enjoying
      herself as much as possible—advice which there was every reason
      to believe would be well attended to; and in the clamorous
      happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle
      adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.




Chapter 42

      Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she
      could not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal
      felicity or domestic comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and
      beauty, and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty
      generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and
      illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all
      real affection for her. Respect, esteem, and confidence had
      vanished for ever; and all his views of domestic happiness were
      overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek
      comfort for the disappointment which his own imprudence had
      brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often console the
      unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of the
      country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his
      principal enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise
      indebted, than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his
      amusement. This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in
      general wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers of
      entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive
      benefit from such as are given.

      Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of
      her father’s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with
      pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his
      affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what
      she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that
      continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in
      exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so
      highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly as now
      the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable
      a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
      from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which,
      rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of
      his daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his
      wife.

      When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure she found
      little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment.
      Their parties abroad were less varied than before, and at home
      she had a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the
      dullness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their
      domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her
      natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were
      removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil
      might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly
      and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a
      watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found,
      what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she
      had looked forward with impatient desire did not, in taking
      place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It
      was consequently necessary to name some other period for the
      commencement of actual felicity—to have some other point on which
      her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the
      pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and
      prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes was now
      the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation
      for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her
      mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included
      Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

      “But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to
      wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment
      would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless
      source of regret in my sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to
      have all my expectations of pleasure realised. A scheme of which
      every part promises delight can never be successful; and general
      disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little
      peculiar vexation.”

      When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very
      minutely to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always
      long expected, and always very short. Those to her mother
      contained little else than that they were just returned from the
      library, where such and such officers had attended them, and
      where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite
      wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would
      have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
      violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going
      off to the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister,
      there was still less to be learnt—for her letters to Kitty,
      though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words
      to be made public.

      After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health,
      good humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn.
      Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in
      town for the winter came back again, and summer finery and summer
      engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet was restored to her usual
      querulous serenity; and, by the middle of June, Kitty was so much
      recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears; an event
      of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by the
      following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not
      to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and
      malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should
      be quartered in Meryton.

      The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now
      fast approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a
      letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its
      commencement and curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be
      prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in
      July, and must be in London again within a month, and as that
      left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as
      they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and
      comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the
      Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to
      the present plan, were to go no farther northwards than
      Derbyshire. In that county there was enough to be seen to occupy
      the chief of their three weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a
      peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerly
      passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a
      few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all
      the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the
      Peak.

      Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on
      seeing the Lakes, and still thought there might have been time
      enough. But it was her business to be satisfied—and certainly her
      temper to be happy; and all was soon right again.

      With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected.
      It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of
      Pemberley and its owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his
      county with impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars without
      his perceiving me.”

      The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to
      pass away before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass
      away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at
      length appear at Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and
      eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the
      particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general
      favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly
      adapted her for attending to them in every way—teaching them,
      playing with them, and loving them.

      The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the
      next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.
      One enjoyment was certain—that of suitableness of companions; a
      suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
      inconveniences—cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure—and
      affection and intelligence, which might supply it among
      themselves if there were disappointments abroad.

      It is not the object of this work to give a description of
      Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places through which
      their route thither lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth,
      Birmingham, etc. are sufficiently known. A small part of
      Derbyshire is all the present concern. To the little town of
      Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner’s former residence, and where
      she had lately learned some acquaintance still remained, they
      bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of
      the country; and within five miles of Lambton, Elizabeth found
      from her aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was not in their
      direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking
      over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an
      inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
      willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.

      “My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have
      heard so much?” said her aunt; “a place, too, with which so many
      of your acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth
      there, you know.”

      Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at
      Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing
      it. She must own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after
      going over so many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or
      satin curtains.

      Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. “If it were merely a fine
      house richly furnished,” said she, “I should not care about it
      myself; but the grounds are delightful. They have some of the
      finest woods in the country.”

      Elizabeth said no more—but her mind could not acquiesce. The
      possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place,
      instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very
      idea, and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt
      than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections;
      and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if
      her private enquiries to the absence of the family were
      unfavourably answered.

      Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
      whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name
      of its proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family
      were down for the summer? A most welcome negative followed the
      last question—and her alarms now being removed, she was at
      leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house
      herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and
      she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper
      air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the
      scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.




Chapter 43

      Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance
      of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length
      they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.

      The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground.
      They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some
      time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.

      Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and
      admired every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually
      ascended for half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of
      a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was
      instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite
      side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound.
      It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising
      ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front,
      a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater, but
      without any artificial appearance. Its banks were neither formal
      nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She had never seen
      a place for which nature had done more, or where natural beauty
      had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were
      all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt
      that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!

      They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the
      door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all
      her apprehension of meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest
      the chambermaid had been mistaken. On applying to see the place,
      they were admitted into the hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited
      for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being where she
      was.

      The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly woman, much
      less fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding
      her. They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large,
      well proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after
      slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect.
      The hill, crowned with wood, which they had descended, receiving
      increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object.
      Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the
      whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks and the
      winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with
      delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were
      taking different positions; but from every window there were
      beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their
      furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor; but
      Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither
      gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real
      elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.

      “And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress!
      With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted!
      Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in
      them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and
      aunt. But no,”—recollecting herself—“that could never be; my
      uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been
      allowed to invite them.”

      This was a lucky recollection—it saved her from something very
      like regret.

      She longed to enquire of the housekeeper whether her master was
      really absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however,
      the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with
      alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds replied that he was, adding, “But we
      expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.” How
      rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any
      circumstance been delayed a day!

      Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and
      saw the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other
      miniatures, over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly,
      how she liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it
      was a picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master’s
      steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He
      is now gone into the army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has
      turned out very wild.”

      Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth
      could not return it.

      “And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the
      miniatures, “is my master—and very like him. It was drawn at the
      same time as the other—about eight years ago.”

      “I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs.
      Gardiner, looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But,
      Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not.”

      Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
      intimation of her knowing her master.

      “Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?”

      Elizabeth coloured, and said: “A little.”

      “And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma’am?”

      “Yes, very handsome.”

      “I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery up
      stairs you will see a finer, larger picture of him than this.
      This room was my late master’s favourite room, and these
      miniatures are just as they used to be then. He was very fond of
      them.”

      This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham’s being among them.

      Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy,
      drawn when she was only eight years old.

      “And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?” said Mrs.
      Gardiner.

      “Oh! yes—the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
      accomplished!—She plays and sings all day long. In the next room
      is a new instrument just come down for her—a present from my
      master; she comes here to-morrow with him.”

      Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant,
      encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks;
      Mrs. Reynolds, either by pride or attachment, had evidently great
      pleasure in talking of her master and his sister.

      “Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”

      “Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend
      half his time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer
      months.”

      “Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Ramsgate.”

      “If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”

      “Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know
      who is good enough for him.”

      Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying,
      “It is very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think
      so.”

      “I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows
      him,” replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty
      far; and she listened with increasing astonishment as the
      housekeeper added, “I have never known a cross word from him in
      my life, and I have known him ever since he was four years old.”

      This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite
      to her ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her
      firmest opinion. Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed
      to hear more, and was grateful to her uncle for saying:

      “There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are
      lucky in having such a master.”

      “Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I
      could not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that
      they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when
      they grow up; and he was always the sweetest-tempered, most
      generous-hearted boy in the world.”

      Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Mr. Darcy?” thought
      she.

      “His father was an excellent man,” said Mrs. Gardiner.

      “Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like
      him—just as affable to the poor.”

      Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for
      more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She
      related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the
      rooms, and the price of the furniture, in vain. Mr. Gardiner,
      highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which he
      attributed her excessive commendation of her master, soon led
      again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many
      merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.

      “He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that
      ever lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of
      nothing but themselves. There is not one of his tenants or
      servants but will give him a good name. Some people call him
      proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it
      is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.”

      “In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought
      Elizabeth.

      “This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked,
      “is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”

      “Perhaps we might be deceived.”

      “That is not very likely; our authority was too good.”

      On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very
      pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and
      lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it
      was but just done to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a
      liking to the room when last at Pemberley.

      “He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked
      towards one of the windows.

      Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should
      enter the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added.
      “Whatever can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in
      a moment. There is nothing he would not do for her.”

      The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms,
      were all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good
      paintings; but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such
      as had been already visible below, she had willingly turned to
      look at some drawings of Miss Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects
      were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.

      In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could
      have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked
      in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her.
      At last it arrested her—and she beheld a striking resemblance to
      Mr. Darcy, with such a smile over the face as she remembered to
      have sometimes seen when he looked at her. She stood several
      minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and
      returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Mrs.
      Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father’s
      lifetime.

      There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more
      gentle sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at
      the height of their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on
      him by Mrs. Reynolds was of no trifling nature. What praise is
      more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant? As a
      brother, a landlord, a master, she considered how many people’s
      happiness were in his guardianship!—how much of pleasure or pain
      was it in his power to bestow!—how much of good or evil must be
      done by him! Every idea that had been brought forward by the
      housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she stood
      before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes
      upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment
      of gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its
      warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.

      When all of the house that was open to general inspection had
      been seen, they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the
      housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at
      the hall-door.

      As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth
      turned back to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and
      while the former was conjecturing as to the date of the building,
      the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road,
      which led behind it to the stables.

      They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was
      his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their
      eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with
      the deepest blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed
      immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced
      towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of
      perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.

      She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,
      received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
      overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the
      picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure
      the other two that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener’s
      expression of surprise, on beholding his master, must immediately
      have told it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking to
      their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift
      her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to
      his civil enquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of
      his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered
      was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
      impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the
      few minutes in which they continued were some of the most
      uncomfortable in her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease;
      when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and
      he repeated his enquiries as to the time of her having left
      Longbourn, and of her stay in Derbyshire, so often, and in so
      hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.

      At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a
      few moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected
      himself, and took leave.

      The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his
      figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by
      her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered
      by shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate,
      the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange it must
      appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so
      vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself
      in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did he thus come
      a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes
      sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his
      discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment
      arrived—that moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She
      blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And
      his behaviour, so strikingly altered—what could it mean? That he
      should even speak to her was amazing!—but to speak with such
      civility, to enquire after her family! Never in her life had she
      seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with
      such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast
      did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his
      letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to
      account for it.

      They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water,
      and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a
      finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it
      was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and,
      though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her
      uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as
      they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene. Her
      thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House,
      whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then was. She longed to
      know what at the moment was passing in his mind—in what manner he
      thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was
      still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he felt
      himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice which was
      not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in
      seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her
      with composure.

      At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence
      of mind aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more
      like herself.

      They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a
      while, ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where
      the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many
      charming views of the valley, the opposite hills, with the long
      range of woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the
      stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish of going round the whole
      park, but feared it might be beyond a walk. With a triumphant
      smile they were told that it was ten miles round. It settled the
      matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought
      them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to
      the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They
      crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air
      of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet
      visited; and the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed
      room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough
      coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its
      windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived
      their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner, who was not a great
      walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the
      carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was, therefore,
      obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on
      the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but
      their progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to
      indulge the taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much
      engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in
      the water, and talking to the man about them, that he advanced
      but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were
      again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was quite equal to
      what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy approaching
      them, and at no great distance. The walk being here less
      sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before
      they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more
      prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and
      to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a
      few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into
      some other path. The idea lasted while a turning in the walk
      concealed him from their view; the turning past, he was
      immediately before them. With a glance, she saw that he had lost
      none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she
      began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place; but she
      had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when
      some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise
      of Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her
      colour changed, and she said no more.

      Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing,
      he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to
      her friends. This was a stroke of civility for which she was
      quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his
      being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people
      against whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself.
      “What will be his surprise,” thought she, “when he knows who they
      are? He takes them now for people of fashion.”

      The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named
      their relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to
      see how he bore it, and was not without the expectation of his
      decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions.
      That he was _surprised_ by the connection was evident; he
      sustained it, however, with fortitude, and so far from going
      away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with
      Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but
      triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some
      relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most
      attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
      expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his
      intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.

      The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr.
      Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as
      often as he chose while he continued in the neighbourhood,
      offering at the same time to supply him with fishing tackle, and
      pointing out those parts of the stream where there was usually
      most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was walking arm-in-arm with
      Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder. Elizabeth said
      nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment must be
      all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and
      continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From what
      can it proceed? It cannot be for _me_—it cannot be for _my_ sake
      that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could
      not work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should
      still love me.”

      After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the
      two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending
      to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some
      curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It
      originated in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the
      morning, found Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and
      consequently preferred her husband’s. Mr. Darcy took her place by
      her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence,
      the lady first spoke. She wished him to know that she had been
      assured of his absence before she came to the place, and
      accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very
      unexpected—“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that
      you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed,
      before we left Bakewell, we understood that you were not
      immediately expected in the country.” He acknowledged the truth
      of it all, and said that business with his steward had occasioned
      his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with
      whom he had been travelling. “They will join me early to-morrow,”
      he continued, “and among them are some who will claim an
      acquaintance with you—Mr. Bingley and his sisters.”

      Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were
      instantly driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley’s name had
      been the last mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by
      his complexion, _his_ mind was not very differently engaged.

      “There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after
      a pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will
      you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to
      your acquaintance during your stay at Lambton?”

      The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too
      great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She
      immediately felt that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of
      being acquainted with her must be the work of her brother, and,
      without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying
      to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of
      her.

      They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought.
      Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was
      flattered and pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her
      was a compliment of the highest kind. They soon outstripped the
      others, and when they had reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs.
      Gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind.

      He then asked her to walk into the house—but she declared herself
      not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time
      much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She
      wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every
      subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling,
      and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance.
      Yet time and her aunt moved slowly—and her patience and her ideas
      were nearly worn out before the _tête-à-tête_ was over.

      On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed to go
      into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined,
      and they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy
      handed the ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off,
      Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.

      The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of
      them pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they
      had expected. “He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and
      unassuming,” said her uncle.

      “There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,”
      replied her aunt, “but it is confined to his air, and is not
      unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper, that though some
      people may call him proud, _I_ have seen nothing of it.”

      “I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was
      more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no
      necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was
      very trifling.”

      “To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as
      Wickham; or, rather, he has not Wickham’s countenance, for his
      features are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he
      was so disagreeable?”

      Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had
      liked him better when they had met in Kent than before, and that
      she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning.

      “But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,”
      replied her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I
      shall not take him at his word, as he might change his mind
      another day, and warn me off his grounds.”

      Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his
      character, but said nothing.

      “From what we have seen of him,” continued Mrs. Gardiner, “I
      really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so
      cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not
      an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing
      about his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of dignity
      in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea
      of his heart. But, to be sure, the good lady who showed us his
      house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help
      laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I suppose,
      and _that_ in the eye of a servant comprehends every virtue.”

      Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in
      vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them
      to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what
      she had heard from his relations in Kent, his actions were
      capable of a very different construction; and that his character
      was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham’s so amiable, as they had
      been considered in Hertfordshire. In confirmation of this, she
      related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in
      which they had been connected, without actually naming her
      authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.

      Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now
      approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave
      way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in
      pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its
      environs to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by
      the morning’s walk they had no sooner dined than she set off
      again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was
      spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many
      years’ discontinuance.

      The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave
      Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends; and she
      could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy’s
      civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted
      with his sister.




Chapter 44

      Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to
      visit her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was
      consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole
      of that morning. But her conclusion was false; for on the very
      morning after their arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They
      had been walking about the place with some of their new friends,
      and were just returning to the inn to dress themselves for dining
      with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a
      window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in a curricle driving
      up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing the livery,
      guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her
      surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour
      which she expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and
      the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined to the
      circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the
      preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing
      had ever suggested it before, but they felt that there was no
      other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter
      than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
      newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation
      of Elizabeth’s feelings was at every moment increasing. She was
      quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of
      disquiet, she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should
      have said too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious
      to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing
      would fail her.

      She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she
      walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw
      such looks of enquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made
      everything worse.

      Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable
      introduction took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that
      her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself.
      Since her being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was
      exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minutes
      convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy. She found it
      difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable.

      Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and,
      though little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her
      appearance womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her
      brother; but there was sense and good humour in her face, and her
      manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had
      expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer as
      ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such
      different feelings.

      They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that
      Bingley was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time
      to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when
      Bingley’s quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he
      entered the room. All Elizabeth’s anger against him had been long
      done away; but had she still felt any, it could hardly have stood
      its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he
      expressed himself on seeing her again. He enquired in a friendly,
      though general way, after her family, and looked and spoke with
      the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.

      To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting
      personage than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The
      whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The
      suspicions which had just arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece
      directed their observation towards each with an earnest though
      guarded enquiry; and they soon drew from those enquiries the full
      conviction that one of them at least knew what it was to love. Of
      the lady’s sensations they remained a little in doubt; but that
      the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was evident enough.

      Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain
      the feelings of each of her visitors; she wanted to compose her
      own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter
      object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of
      success, for those to whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were
      prepossessed in her favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was
      eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.

      In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister;
      and, oh! how ardently did she long to know whether any of his
      were directed in a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he
      talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased
      herself with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was trying
      to trace a resemblance. But, though this might be imaginary, she
      could not be deceived as to his behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had
      been set up as a rival to Jane. No look appeared on either side
      that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred between them that
      could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point she was soon
      satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere
      they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a
      recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of
      saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared.
      He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking
      together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that
      it “was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing
      her;” and, before she could reply, he added, “It is above eight
      months. We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were
      all dancing together at Netherfield.”

      Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he
      afterwards took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of
      the rest, whether _all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was
      not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there
      was a look and a manner which gave them meaning.

      It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy
      himself; but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an
      expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said she
      heard an accent so removed from _hauteur_ or disdain of his
      companions, as convinced her that the improvement of manners
      which she had yesterday witnessed however temporary its existence
      might prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw him thus
      seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people
      with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a
      disgrace—when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to
      the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected
      their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage—the difference, the
      change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she
      could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never,
      even in the company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his
      dignified relations at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to
      please, so free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as
      now, when no importance could result from the success of his
      endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his
      attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and
      censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings.

      Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they
      arose to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in
      expressing their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss
      Bennet, to dinner at Pemberley, before they left the country.
      Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in
      the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner
      looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how _she_, whom the
      invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance,
      but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming however, that
      this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment
      than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who
      was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she
      ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next
      was fixed on.

      Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing
      Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to her, and
      many enquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends.
      Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak
      of her sister, was pleased, and on this account, as well as some
      others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of
      considering the last half-hour with some satisfaction, though
      while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager
      to be alone, and fearful of enquiries or hints from her uncle and
      aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their
      favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.

      But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s curiosity;
      it was not their wish to force her communication. It was evident
      that she was much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had
      before any idea of; it was evident that he was very much in love
      with her. They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify
      enquiry.

      Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and,
      as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find.
      They could not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn
      his character from their own feelings and his servant’s report,
      without any reference to any other account, the circle in
      Hertfordshire to which he was known would not have recognized it
      for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing
      the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible that the authority
      of a servant who had known him since he was four years old, and
      whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily
      rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
      their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight.
      They had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably
      had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants
      of a small market-town where the family did not visit. It was
      acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and did much
      good among the poor.

      With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was
      not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of his
      concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood,
      it was yet a well-known fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he
      had left many debts behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards
      discharged.

      As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening
      more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it
      seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings
      towards _one_ in that mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours
      endeavouring to make them out. She certainly did not hate him.
      No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been
      ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him, that could be so
      called. The respect created by the conviction of his valuable
      qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
      time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now
      heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony
      so highly in his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in
      so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all,
      above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of
      goodwill which could not be overlooked. It was gratitude;
      gratitude, not merely for having once loved her, but for loving
      her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony
      of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations
      accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would
      avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental
      meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any
      indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where
      their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good
      opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his
      sister. Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only
      astonishment but gratitude—for to love, ardent love, it must be
      attributed; and as such its impression on her was of a sort to be
      encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be
      exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to
      him, she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted
      to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself,
      and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should
      employ the power, which her fancy told her she still possessed,
      of bringing on her the renewal of his addresses.

      It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the
      niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s in coming to
      see them on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley, for she had
      reached it only to a late breakfast, ought to be imitated, though
      it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their
      side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to
      wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They were,
      therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when she asked
      herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.

      Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme
      had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made
      of his meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.




Chapter 45

      Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley’s dislike of her
      had originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how
      unwelcome her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was
      curious to know with how much civility on that lady’s side the
      acquaintance would now be renewed.

      On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the
      saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer.
      Its windows opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing
      view of the high woody hills behind the house, and of the
      beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over
      the intermediate lawn.

      In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting
      there with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom
      she lived in London. Georgiana’s reception of them was very
      civil, but attended with all the embarrassment which, though
      proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily
      give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of her
      being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece, however,
      did her justice, and pitied her.

      By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a
      curtsey; and, on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such
      pauses must always be, succeeded for a few moments. It was first
      broken by Mrs. Annesley, a genteel, agreeable-looking woman,
      whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to
      be more truly well-bred than either of the others; and between
      her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from Elizabeth, the
      conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she wished
      for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
      short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.

      Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss
      Bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss
      Darcy, without calling her attention. This observation would not
      have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter, had they
      not been seated at an inconvenient distance; but she was not
      sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much. Her own thoughts
      were employing her. She expected every moment that some of the
      gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, she feared that the
      master of the house might be amongst them; and whether she wished
      or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After sitting in
      this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Miss Bingley’s
      voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold enquiry
      after the health of her family. She answered with equal
      indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.

      The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
      entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all
      the finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till
      after many a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to
      Miss Darcy had been given, to remind her of her post. There was
      now employment for the whole party—for though they could not all
      talk, they could all eat; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes,
      nectarines, and peaches soon collected them round the table.

      While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding
      whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr.
      Darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room;
      and then, though but a moment before she had believed her wishes
      to predominate, she began to regret that he came.

      He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three
      other gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had
      left him only on learning that the ladies of the family intended
      a visit to Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than
      Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;
      a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the
      more easily kept, because she saw that the suspicions of the
      whole party were awakened against them, and that there was
      scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour when he first
      came into the room. In no countenance was attentive curiosity so
      strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the smiles
      which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its
      objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her
      attentions to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her
      brother’s entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and
      Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister and herself to
      get acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible, every attempt
      at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley saw all this
      likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first
      opportunity of saying, with sneering civility:

      “Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ——shire Militia removed from
      Meryton? They must be a great loss to _your_ family.”

      In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name; but
      Elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her
      thoughts; and the various recollections connected with him gave
      her a moment’s distress; but exerting herself vigorously to repel
      the ill-natured attack, she presently answered the question in a
      tolerably detached tone. While she spoke, an involuntary glance
      showed her Darcy, with a heightened complexion, earnestly looking
      at her, and his sister overcome with confusion, and unable to
      lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what pain she was then
      giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained
      from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
      Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she
      believed her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which
      might injure her in Darcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the
      latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of
      her family were connected with that corps. Not a syllable had
      ever reached her of Miss Darcy’s meditated elopement. To no
      creature had it been revealed, where secrecy was possible, except
      to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley’s connections her brother was
      particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very wish which
      Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
      hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and
      without meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate
      him from Miss Bennet, it is probable that it might add something
      to his lively concern for the welfare of his friend.

      Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his
      emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not
      approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time,
      though not enough to be able to speak any more. Her brother,
      whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest
      in the affair, and the very circumstance which had been designed
      to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have fixed them on
      her more and more cheerfully.

      Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer
      above mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their
      carriage Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on
      Elizabeth’s person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not
      join her. Her brother’s recommendation was enough to ensure her
      favour; his judgement could not err. And he had spoken in such
      terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without the power of
      finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When Darcy
      returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to
      him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.

      “How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,”
      she cried; “I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she
      is since the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and
      I were agreeing that we should not have known her again.”

      However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he
      contented himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other
      alteration than her being rather tanned, no miraculous
      consequence of travelling in the summer.

      “For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never
      could see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion
      has no brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her
      nose wants character—there is nothing marked in its lines. Her
      teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for
      her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never
      see anything extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish
      look, which I do not like at all; and in her air altogether there
      is a self-sufficiency without fashion, which is intolerable.”

      Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this
      was not the best method of recommending herself; but angry people
      are not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat
      nettled, she had all the success she expected. He was resolutely
      silent, however, and, from a determination of making him speak,
      she continued:

      “I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed
      we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I
      particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been
      dining at Netherfield, ‘_She_ a beauty!—I should as soon call her
      mother a wit.’ But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I
      believe you thought her rather pretty at one time.”

      “Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but
      _that_ was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since
      I have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my
      acquaintance.”

      He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the
      satisfaction of having forced him to say what gave no one any
      pain but herself.

      Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred
      during their visit, as they returned, except what had
      particularly interested them both. The look and behaviour of
      everybody they had seen were discussed, except of the person who
      had mostly engaged their attention. They talked of his sister,
      his friends, his house, his fruit—of everything but himself; yet
      Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of him,
      and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece’s
      beginning the subject.




Chapter 46

      Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a
      letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this
      disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had
      now been spent there; but on the third her repining was over, and
      her sister justified, by the receipt of two letters from her at
      once, on one of which was marked that it had been missent
      elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as Jane had written
      the direction remarkably ill.

      They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and
      her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off
      by themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had
      been written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of
      all their little parties and engagements, with such news as the
      country afforded; but the latter half, which was dated a day
      later, and written in evident agitation, gave more important
      intelligence. It was to this effect:

      “Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred
      of a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of
      alarming you—be assured that we are all well. What I have to say
      relates to poor Lydia. An express came at twelve last night, just
      as we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us
      that she was gone off to Scotland with one of his officers; to
      own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our surprise. To Kitty,
      however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am very, very
      sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing to
      hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
      Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this
      step (and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His
      choice is disinterested at least, for he must know my father can
      give her nothing. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father
      bears it better. How thankful am I that we never let them know
      what has been said against him; we must forget it ourselves. They
      were off Saturday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but were
      not missed till yesterday morning at eight. The express was sent
      off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed within ten
      miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect him here
      soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of their
      intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
      mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I
      hardly know what I have written.”

      Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely
      knowing what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter
      instantly seized the other, and opening it with the utmost
      impatience, read as follows: it had been written a day later than
      the conclusion of the first.

      “By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried
      letter; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not
      confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer
      for being coherent. Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would
      write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed.
      Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham and our poor Lydia
      would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place,
      for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to
      Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton
      the day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia’s
      short letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were
      going to Gretna Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing
      his belief that W. never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia
      at all, which was repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking
      the alarm, set off from B. intending to trace their route. He did
      trace them easily to Clapham, but no further; for on entering
      that place, they removed into a hackney coach, and dismissed the
      chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that is known after this
      is, that they were seen to continue the London road. I know not
      what to think. After making every possible enquiry on that side
      London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing
      them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and
      Hatfield, but without any success—no such people had been seen to
      pass through. With the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn,
      and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to
      his heart. I am sincerely grieved for him and Mrs. F., but no one
      can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very
      great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I cannot think
      so ill of him. Many circumstances might make it more eligible for
      them to be married privately in town than to pursue their first
      plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design against a young
      woman of Lydia’s connections, which is not likely, can I suppose
      her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however,
      that Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he
      shook his head when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared W.
      was not a man to be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and
      keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it would be better; but
      this is not to be expected. And as to my father, I never in my
      life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having
      concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence,
      one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have
      been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as
      the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return?
      I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if
      inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have
      just told you I would not; but circumstances are such that I
      cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as
      possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not
      afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to
      ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel
      Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I
      am sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him
      to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel
      Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In
      such an exigence, my uncle’s advice and assistance would be
      everything in the world; he will immediately comprehend what I
      must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”

      “Oh! where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her
      seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him,
      without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she
      reached the door it was opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy
      appeared. Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and
      before he could recover himself to speak, she, in whose mind
      every idea was superseded by Lydia’s situation, hastily
      exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find
      Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I
      have not an instant to lose.”

      “Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than
      politeness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a
      minute; but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs.
      Gardiner. You are not well enough; you cannot go yourself.”

      Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she
      felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them.
      Calling back the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though
      in so breathless an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to
      fetch his master and mistress home instantly.

      On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself,
      and looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to
      leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and
      commiseration, “Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could
      take to give you present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you
      one? You are very ill.”

      “No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself.
      “There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only
      distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from
      Longbourn.”

      She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes
      could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could
      only say something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her
      in compassionate silence. At length she spoke again. “I have just
      had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be
      concealed from anyone. My younger sister has left all her
      friends—has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of—of Mr.
      Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton. _You_ know him
      too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections,
      nothing that can tempt him to—she is lost for ever.”

      Darcy was fixed in astonishment. “When I consider,” she added in
      a yet more agitated voice, “that _I_ might have prevented it! _I_
      who knew what he was. Had I but explained some part of it
      only—some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his
      character been known, this could not have happened. But it is
      all—all too late now.”

      “I am grieved indeed,” cried Darcy; “grieved—shocked. But is it
      certain—absolutely certain?”

      “Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were
      traced almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not
      gone to Scotland.”

      “And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover
      her?”

      “My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my
      uncle’s immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in
      half-an-hour. But nothing can be done—I know very well that
      nothing can be done. How is such a man to be worked on? How are
      they even to be discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is
      every way horrible!”

      Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.

      “When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character—Oh! had I known
      what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not—I was afraid of
      doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”

      Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was
      walking up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow
      contracted, his air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and
      instantly understood it. Her power was sinking; everything _must_
      sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of
      the deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor condemn, but
      the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing consolatory to
      her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It was, on the
      contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
      wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have
      loved him, as now, when all love must be vain.

      But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her.
      Lydia—the humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all,
      soon swallowed up every private care; and covering her face with
      her handkerchief, Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else;
      and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a
      sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in a
      manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise
      restraint, said, “I am afraid you have been long desiring my
      absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but
      real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything
      could be either said or done on my part that might offer
      consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with
      vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks.
      This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having
      the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”

      “Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say
      that urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the
      unhappy truth as long as it is possible, I know it cannot be
      long.”

      He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow
      for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was
      at present reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her
      relations, with only one serious, parting look, went away.

      As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that
      they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality
      as had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she
      threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their
      acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at
      the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted
      its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its
      termination.

      If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection,
      Elizabeth’s change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor
      faulty. But if otherwise—if regard springing from such sources is
      unreasonable or unnatural, in comparison of what is so often
      described as arising on a first interview with its object, and
      even before two words have been exchanged, nothing can be said in
      her defence, except that she had given somewhat of a trial to the
      latter method in her partiality for Wickham, and that its ill
      success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the other less
      interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go
      with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy
      must produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that
      wretched business. Never, since reading Jane’s second letter, had
      she entertained a hope of Wickham’s meaning to marry her. No one
      but Jane, she thought, could flatter herself with such an
      expectation. Surprise was the least of her feelings on this
      development. While the contents of the first letter remained in
      her mind, she was all surprise—all astonishment that Wickham
      should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry for
      money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared
      incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an
      attachment as this she might have sufficient charms; and though
      she did not suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an
      elopement without the intention of marriage, she had no
      difficulty in believing that neither her virtue nor her
      understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.

      She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire,
      that Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that
      Lydia wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody.
      Sometimes one officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite,
      as their attentions raised them in her opinion. Her affections
      had continually been fluctuating but never without an object. The
      mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a
      girl—oh! how acutely did she now feel it!

      She was wild to be at home—to hear, to see, to be upon the spot
      to share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon
      her, in a family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable
      of exertion, and requiring constant attendance; and though almost
      persuaded that nothing could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s
      interference seemed of the utmost importance, and till he entered
      the room her impatience was severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had
      hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant’s account that
      their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them instantly
      on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their
      summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the
      postscript of the last with trembling energy.— Though Lydia had
      never been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not
      but be deeply afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned
      in it; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror,
      Mr. Gardiner promised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth,
      though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of gratitude;
      and all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating
      to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be off as
      soon as possible. “But what is to be done about Pemberley?” cried
      Mrs. Gardiner. “John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for
      us; was it so?”

      “Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our
      engagement. _That_ is all settled.”

      “That is all settled;” repeated the other, as she ran into her
      room to prepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to
      disclose the real truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!”

      But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her
      in the hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth
      been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that
      all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but
      she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst
      the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at
      Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour,
      however, saw the whole completed; and Mr. Gardiner meanwhile
      having settled his account at the inn, nothing remained to be
      done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the
      morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could
      have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to
      Longbourn.




Chapter 47

      “I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle,
      as they drove from the town; “and really, upon serious
      consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judge as
      your eldest sister does on the matter. It appears to me so very
      unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a
      girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and who was
      actually staying in his colonel’s family, that I am strongly
      inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends would
      not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the
      regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His
      temptation is not adequate to the risk!”

      “Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a
      moment.

      “Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your
      uncle’s opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency,
      honour, and interest, for him to be guilty of. I cannot think so
      very ill of Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him
      up, as to believe him capable of it?”

      “Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other
      neglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so!
      But I dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if
      that had been the case?”

      “In the first place,” replied Mr. Gardiner, “there is no absolute
      proof that they are not gone to Scotland.”

      “Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is
      such a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be
      found on the Barnet road.”

      “Well, then—supposing them to be in London. They may be there,
      though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional
      purpose. It is not likely that money should be very abundant on
      either side; and it might strike them that they could be more
      economically, though less expeditiously, married in London than
      in Scotland.”

      “But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must
      their marriage be private? Oh, no, no—this is not likely. His
      most particular friend, you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded
      of his never intending to marry her. Wickham will never marry a
      woman without some money. He cannot afford it. And what claims
      has Lydia—what attraction has she beyond youth, health, and good
      humour that could make him, for her sake, forego every chance of
      benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what restraint the
      apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
      dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I
      know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But
      as to your other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good.
      Lydia has no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from
      my father’s behaviour, from his indolence and the little
      attention he has ever seemed to give to what was going forward in
      his family, that _he_ would do as little, and think as little
      about it, as any father could do, in such a matter.”

      “But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love
      of him as to consent to live with him on any terms other than
      marriage?”

      “It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed,” replied
      Elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of
      decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. But,
      really, I know not what to say. Perhaps I am not doing her
      justice. But she is very young; she has never been taught to
      think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year, nay, for a
      twelvemonth—she has been given up to nothing but amusement and
      vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most
      idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in
      her way. Since the ——shire were first quartered in Meryton,
      nothing but love, flirtation, and officers have been in her head.
      She has been doing everything in her power by thinking and
      talking on the subject, to give greater—what shall I call it?
      susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively
      enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of person
      and address that can captivate a woman.”

      “But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so very
      ill of Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt.”

      “Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever
      might be their former conduct, that she would think capable of
      such an attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane
      knows, as well as I do, what Wickham really is. We both know that
      he has been profligate in every sense of the word; that he has
      neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and deceitful
      as he is insinuating.”

      “And do you really know all this?” cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose
      curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.

      “I do indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you, the
      other day, of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you
      yourself, when last at Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke
      of the man who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality
      towards him. And there are other circumstances which I am not at
      liberty—which it is not worth while to relate; but his lies about
      the whole Pemberley family are endless. From what he said of Miss
      Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved,
      disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He must
      know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
      her.”

      “But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what
      you and Jane seem so well to understand?”

      “Oh, yes!—that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and
      saw so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel
      Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of the truth myself. And when I
      returned home, the ——shire was to leave Meryton in a week or
      fortnight’s time. As that was the case, neither Jane, to whom I
      related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary to make our
      knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to any
      one, that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of him
      should then be overthrown? And even when it was settled that
      Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening her
      eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could be
      in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such
      a consequence as _this_ could ensue, you may easily believe, was
      far enough from my thoughts.”

      “When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason,
      I suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”

      “Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on
      either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you
      must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be
      thrown away. When first he entered the corps, she was ready
      enough to admire him; but so we all were. Every girl in or near
      Meryton was out of her senses about him for the first two months;
      but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular attention;
      and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and
      wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the
      regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her
      favourites.”

      It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could
      be added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this
      interesting subject, by its repeated discussion, no other could
      detain them from it long, during the whole of the journey. From
      Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the
      keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find no interval
      of ease or forgetfulness.

      They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one
      night on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day.
      It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not
      have been wearied by long expectations.

      The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were
      standing on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock;
      and, when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise
      that lighted up their faces, and displayed itself over their
      whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first
      pleasing earnest of their welcome.

      Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty
      kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running
      down from her mother’s apartment, immediately met her.

      Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears
      filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether
      anything had been heard of the fugitives.

      “Not yet,” replied Jane. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I
      hope everything will be well.”

      “Is my father in town?”

      “Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”

      “And have you heard from him often?”

      “We have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday
      to say that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his
      directions, which I particularly begged him to do. He merely
      added that he should not write again till he had something of
      importance to mention.”

      “And my mother—how is she? How are you all?”

      “My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are
      greatly shaken. She is up stairs and will have great satisfaction
      in seeing you all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary
      and Kitty, thank Heaven, are quite well.”

      “But you—how are you?” cried Elizabeth. “You look pale. How much
      you must have gone through!”

      Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and
      their conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs.
      Gardiner were engaged with their children, was now put an end to
      by the approach of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and
      aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles
      and tears.

      When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which
      Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the
      others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to
      give. The sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence
      of her heart suggested had not yet deserted her; she still
      expected that it would all end well, and that every morning would
      bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father, to explain
      their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.

      Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few
      minutes’ conversation together, received them exactly as might be
      expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives
      against the villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her
      own sufferings and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to
      whose ill-judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must
      principally be owing.

      “If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to
      Brighton, with all my family, _this_ would not have happened; but
      poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of her. Why did the
      Forsters ever let her go out of their sight? I am sure there was
      some great neglect or other on their side, for she is not the
      kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been well looked
      after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge
      of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child! And
      now here’s Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight
      Wickham, wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and
      what is to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out
      before he is cold in his grave, and if you are not kind to us,
      brother, I do not know what we shall do.”

      They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner,
      after general assurances of his affection for her and all her
      family, told her that he meant to be in London the very next day,
      and would assist Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering
      Lydia.

      “Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he; “though it is right
      to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it
      as certain. It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a
      few days more we may gain some news of them; and till we know
      that they are not married, and have no design of marrying, do not
      let us give the matter over as lost. As soon as I get to town I
      shall go to my brother, and make him come home with me to
      Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult together as to what
      is to be done.”

      “Oh! my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what
      I could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find
      them out, wherever they may be; and if they are not married
      already, _make_ them marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not
      let them wait for that, but tell Lydia she shall have as much
      money as she chooses to buy them, after they are married. And,
      above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting. Tell him what a
      dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my wits—and
      have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me—such spasms
      in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that
      I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not
      to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me,
      for she does not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother,
      how kind you are! I know you will contrive it all.”

      But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest
      endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation
      to her, as well in her hopes as her fear; and after talking with
      her in this manner till dinner was on the table, they all left
      her to vent all her feelings on the housekeeper, who attended in
      the absence of her daughters.

      Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no
      real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not
      attempt to oppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence
      enough to hold her tongue before the servants, while they waited
      at table, and judged it better that _one_ only of the household,
      and the one whom they could most trust should comprehend all her
      fears and solicitude on the subject.

      In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who
      had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make
      their appearance before. One came from her books, and the other
      from her toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably
      calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss
      of her favourite sister, or the anger which she had herself
      incurred in this business, had given more of fretfulness than
      usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was mistress
      enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of
      grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:

      “This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much
      talked of. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the
      wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”

      Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she
      added, “Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from
      it this useful lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is
      irretrievable; that one false step involves her in endless ruin;
      that her reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful; and
      that she cannot be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the
      undeserving of the other sex.”

      Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much
      oppressed to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console
      herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before
      them.

      In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for
      half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed
      herself of the opportunity of making many enquiries, which Jane
      was equally eager to satisfy. After joining in general
      lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which
      Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could
      not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the
      subject, by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it
      which I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What
      did Colonel Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything
      before the elopement took place? They must have seen them
      together for ever.”

      “Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some
      partiality, especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him
      any alarm. I am so grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive
      and kind to the utmost. He _was_ coming to us, in order to assure
      us of his concern, before he had any idea of their not being gone
      to Scotland: when that apprehension first got abroad, it hastened
      his journey.”

      “And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he
      know of their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny
      himself?”

      “Yes; but, when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing
      anything of their plans, and would not give his real opinion
      about it. He did not repeat his persuasion of their not
      marrying—and from _that_, I am inclined to hope, he might have
      been misunderstood before.”

      “And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you
      entertained a doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?”

      “How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I
      felt a little uneasy—a little fearful of my sister’s happiness
      with him in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not
      been always quite right. My father and mother knew nothing of
      that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then
      owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest
      of us, that in Lydia’s last letter she had prepared her for such
      a step. She had known, it seems, of their being in love with each
      other, many weeks.”

      “But not before they went to Brighton?”

      “No, I believe not.”

      “And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself?
      Does he know his real character?”

      “I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he
      formerly did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant.
      And since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that he
      left Meryton greatly in debt; but I hope this may be false.”

      “Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of
      him, this could not have happened!”

      “Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her sister. “But to
      expose the former faults of any person without knowing what their
      present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the
      best intentions.”

      “Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia’s note to
      his wife?”

      “He brought it with him for us to see.”

      Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth.
      These were the contents:

      “My dear Harriet,
      “You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
      laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I
      am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess
      with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man
      in the world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy
      without him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send
      them word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it
      will make the surprise the greater, when I write to them and sign
      my name ‘Lydia Wickham.’ What a good joke it will be! I can
      hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not
      keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him I
      hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will
      dance with him at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I
      shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you
      would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown
      before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel
      Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey.

      “Your affectionate friend,
      “LYDIA BENNET.”

      “Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she
      had finished it. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a
      moment! But at least it shows that _she_ was serious on the
      subject of their journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade
      her to, it was not on her side a _scheme_ of infamy. My poor
      father! how he must have felt it!”

      “I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for
      full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the
      whole house in such confusion!”

      “Oh! Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a servant belonging to it
      who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”

      “I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a
      time is very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I
      endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid
      I did not do so much as I might have done! But the horror of what
      might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties.”

      “Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not
      look well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care
      and anxiety upon yourself alone.”

      “Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in
      every fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either
      of them. Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much,
      that her hours of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt
      Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went away;
      and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. She was of
      great use and comfort to us all. And Lady Lucas has been very
      kind; she walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us,
      and offered her services, or any of her daughters’, if they
      should be of use to us.”

      “She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth; “perhaps
      she _meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one
      cannot see too little of one’s neighbours. Assistance is
      impossible; condolence insufferable. Let them triumph over us at
      a distance, and be satisfied.”

      She then proceeded to enquire into the measures which her father
      had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his
      daughter.

      “He meant I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place
      where they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if
      anything could be made out from them. His principal object must
      be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them
      from Clapham. It had come with a fare from London; and as he
      thought that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady’s removing
      from one carriage into another might be remarked he meant to make
      enquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow discover at what house
      the coachman had before set down his fare, he determined to make
      enquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out
      the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any other
      designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be
      gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had
      difficulty in finding out even so much as this.”




Chapter 48

      The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the
      next morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line
      from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a
      most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time
      they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude that he
      had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of _that_ they
      would have been glad to be certain. Mr. Gardiner had waited only
      for the letters before he set off.

      When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving
      constant information of what was going on, and their uncle
      promised, at parting, to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to
      Longbourn, as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his
      sister, who considered it as the only security for her husband’s
      not being killed in a duel.

      Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a
      few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be
      serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs.
      Bennet, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of
      freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and
      always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening
      them up—though, as she never came without reporting some fresh
      instance of Wickham’s extravagance or irregularity, she seldom
      went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found
      them.

      All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three
      months before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared
      to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues,
      all honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into
      every tradesman’s family. Everybody declared that he was the
      wickedest young man in the world; and everybody began to find out
      that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness.
      Elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said,
      believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister’s ruin
      more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it,
      became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come
      when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before
      entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained
      some news of them.

      Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife
      received a letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he
      had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come
      to Gracechurch Street; that Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and
      Clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory
      information; and that he was now determined to enquire at all the
      principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet thought it possible they
      might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to London,
      before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself did not
      expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was
      eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that
      Mr. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London
      and promised to write again very soon. There was also a
      postscript to this effect:

      “I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if
      possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the regiment,
      whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be
      likely to know in what part of town he has now concealed himself.
      If there were anyone that one could apply to with a probability
      of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential
      consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel
      Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy
      us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy could
      tell us what relations he has now living, better than any other
      person.”

      Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference
      to her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give
      any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment
      deserved. She had never heard of his having had any relations,
      except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many
      years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions in
      the ——shire might be able to give more information; and though
      she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a
      something to look forward to.

      Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most
      anxious part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival
      of letters was the grand object of every morning’s impatience.
      Through letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be
      communicated, and every succeeding day was expected to bring some
      news of importance.

      But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived
      for their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins;
      which, as Jane had received directions to open all that came for
      him in his absence, she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew
      what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and
      read it likewise. It was as follows:

      “My dear Sir,
      “I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
      in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are
      now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a
      letter from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs.
      Collins and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all your
      respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of
      the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time
      can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part that can
      alleviate so severe a misfortune—or that may comfort you, under a
      circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting to a
      parent’s mind. The death of your daughter would have been a
      blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be
      lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte
      informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your
      daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence;
      though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and
      Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her own disposition must
      be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity,
      at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to
      be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins,
      but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have
      related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this
      false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of
      all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself
      condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family?
      And this consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with
      augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for
      had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your
      sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to console
      yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child
      from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of
      her own heinous offense.

      “I am, dear sir, etc., etc.”

      Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer
      from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant
      nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single
      relationship with whom he kept up any connection, and it was
      certain that he had no near one living. His former acquaintances
      had been numerous; but since he had been in the militia, it did
      not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any
      of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as
      likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his
      own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in
      addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations, for it
      had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a
      very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than
      a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at
      Brighton. He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour
      were still more formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to
      conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family. Jane heard
      them with horror. “A gamester!” she cried. “This is wholly
      unexpected. I had not an idea of it.”

      Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see
      their father at home on the following day, which was Saturday.
      Rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours,
      he had yielded to his brother-in-law’s entreaty that he would
      return to his family, and leave it to him to do whatever occasion
      might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit. When
      Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did not express so much
      satisfaction as her children expected, considering what her
      anxiety for his life had been before.

      “What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried.
      “Sure he will not leave London before he has found them. Who is
      to fight Wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?”

      As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that
      she and the children should go to London, at the same time that
      Mr. Bennet came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the
      first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to
      Longbourn.

      Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and
      her Derbyshire friend that had attended her from that part of the
      world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them
      by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs.
      Gardiner had formed, of their being followed by a letter from
      him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received none since her
      return that could come from Pemberley.

      The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse
      for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore,
      could be fairly conjectured from _that_, though Elizabeth, who
      was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings,
      was perfectly aware that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she
      could have borne the dread of Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. It
      would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of
      two.

      When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
      philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in
      the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had
      taken him away, and it was some time before his daughters had
      courage to speak of it.

      It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea,
      that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on
      her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured,
      he replied, “Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself?
      It has been my own doing, and I ought to feel it.”

      “You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth.

      “You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so
      prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how
      much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered
      by the impression. It will pass away soon enough.”

      “Do you suppose them to be in London?”

      “Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”

      “And Lydia used to want to go to London,” added Kitty.

      “She is happy then,” said her father drily; “and her residence
      there will probably be of some duration.”

      Then after a short silence he continued:

      “Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice
      to me last May, which, considering the event, shows some
      greatness of mind.”

      They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her
      mother’s tea.

      “This is a parade,” he cried, “which does one good; it gives such
      an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will
      sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as
      much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty
      runs away.”

      “I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty fretfully. “If _I_
      should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.”

      “_You_ go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as
      Eastbourne for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to
      be cautious, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is
      ever to enter into my house again, nor even to pass through the
      village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up
      with one of your sisters. And you are never to stir out of doors
      till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day
      in a rational manner.”

      Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to
      cry.

      “Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. If you are
      a good girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review
      at the end of them.”




Chapter 49

      Two days after Mr. Bennet’s return, as Jane and Elizabeth were
      walking together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the
      housekeeper coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to
      call them to their mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead
      of the expected summons, when they approached her, she said to
      Miss Bennet, “I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but
      I was in hopes you might have got some good news from town, so I
      took the liberty of coming to ask.”

      “What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.”

      “Dear madam,” cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, “don’t you
      know there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He
      has been here this half-hour, and master has had a letter.”

      Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech.
      They ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from
      thence to the library; their father was in neither; and they were
      on the point of seeking him up stairs with their mother, when
      they were met by the butler, who said:

      “If you are looking for my master, ma’am, he is walking towards
      the little copse.”

      Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall
      once more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was
      deliberately pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of
      the paddock.

      Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as
      Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for
      breath, came up with him, and eagerly cried out:

      “Oh, papa, what news—what news? Have you heard from my uncle?”

      “Yes I have had a letter from him by express.”

      “Well, and what news does it bring—good or bad?”

      “What is there of good to be expected?” said he, taking the
      letter from his pocket. “But perhaps you would like to read it.”

      Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.

      “Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself
      what it is about.”

      “Gracechurch Street, _Monday, August_ 2.

      “My dear Brother,
      “At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
      as, upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon
      after you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out
      in what part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till
      we meet; it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen
      them both—”
          “Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane; “they are
          married!”

      Elizabeth read on:

      “I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find
      there was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to
      perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your
      side, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is
      required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement,
      her equal share of the five thousand pounds secured among your
      children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and,
      moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during
      your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions
      which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying
      with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall
      send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me
      your answer. You will easily comprehend, from these particulars,
      that Mr. Wickham’s circumstances are not so hopeless as they are
      generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that
      respect; and I am happy to say there will be some little money,
      even when all his debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in
      addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case,
      you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole
      of this business, I will immediately give directions to
      Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be
      the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore
      stay quiet at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care.
      Send back your answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write
      explicitly. We have judged it best that my niece should be
      married from this house, of which I hope you will approve. She
      comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as anything more
      is determined on. Yours, etc.,

      “EDW. GARDINER.”

      “Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. “Can it
      be possible that he will marry her?”

      “Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him,” said
      her sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”

      “And have you answered the letter?” cried Elizabeth.

      “No; but it must be done soon.”

      Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time
      before he wrote.

      “Oh! my dear father,” she cried, “come back and write
      immediately. Consider how important every moment is in such a
      case.”

      “Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble
      yourself.”

      “I dislike it very much,” he replied; “but it must be done.”

      And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the
      house.

      “And may I ask—” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must
      be complied with.”

      “Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.”

      “And they _must_ marry! Yet he is _such_ a man!”

      “Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But
      there are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how
      much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the
      other, how am I ever to pay him.”

      “Money! My uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?”

      “I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight
      a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty
      after I am gone.”

      “That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred
      to me before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to
      remain! Oh! it must be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I
      am afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all
      this.”

      “No,” said her father; “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a
      farthing less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to
      think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship.”

      “Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
      repaid?”

      Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought,
      continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then
      went on to the library to write, and the girls walked into the
      breakfast-room.

      “And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as
      they were by themselves. “How strange this is! And for _this_ we
      are to be thankful. That they should marry, small as is their
      chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are
      forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!”

      “I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he
      certainly would not marry Lydia if he had not a real regard for
      her. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing
      him, I cannot believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like
      it, has been advanced. He has children of his own, and may have
      more. How could he spare half ten thousand pounds?”

      “If he were ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,”
      said Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our
      sister, we shall exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for
      them, because Wickham has not sixpence of his own. The kindness
      of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking her
      home, and affording her their personal protection and
      countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of
      gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is actually
      with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she
      will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she
      first sees my aunt!”

      “We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,”
      said Jane: “I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His
      consenting to marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is
      come to a right way of thinking. Their mutual affection will
      steady them; and I flatter myself they will settle so quietly,
      and live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past
      imprudence forgotten.”

      “Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “as neither
      you, nor I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of
      it.”

      It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all
      likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to
      the library, therefore, and asked their father whether he would
      not wish them to make it known to her. He was writing and,
      without raising his head, coolly replied:

      “Just as you please.”

      “May we take my uncle’s letter to read to her?”

      “Take whatever you like, and get away.”

      Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went
      up stairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet:
      one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight
      preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet
      could hardly contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Mr.
      Gardiner’s hope of Lydia’s being soon married, her joy burst
      forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance. She
      was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she had ever
      been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter
      would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her
      felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.

      “My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried. “This is delightful indeed! She
      will be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at
      sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he
      would manage everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear
      Wickham too! But the clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write
      to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run
      down to your father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay,
      stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will
      put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we
      shall be together when we meet!”

      Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the
      violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the
      obligations which Mr. Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under.

      “For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a
      great measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has
      pledged himself to assist Mr. Wickham with money.”

      “Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it
      but her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and
      my children must have had all his money, you know; and it is the
      first time we have ever had anything from him, except a few
      presents. Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall have a
      daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well it sounds! And she was
      only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in such a flutter,
      that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you write
      for me. We will settle with your father about the money
      afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”

      She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin,
      and cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful
      orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her
      to wait till her father was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s
      delay, she observed, would be of small importance; and her mother
      was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes,
      too, came into her head.

      “I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and
      tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come
      back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and
      order the carriage. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I
      am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here
      comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you heard the good news? Miss
      Lydia is going to be married; and you shall all have a bowl of
      punch to make merry at her wedding.”

      Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received
      her congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this
      folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with
      freedom.

      Poor Lydia’s situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it
      was no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and
      though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness nor
      worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in
      looking back to what they had feared, only two hours ago, she
      felt all the advantages of what they had gained.




Chapter 50

      Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life
      that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an
      annual sum for the better provision of his children, and of his
      wife, if she survived him. He now wished it more than ever. Had
      he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not have been
      indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now
      be purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of
      the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be her husband
      might then have rested in its proper place.

      He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to
      anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of his
      brother-in-law, and he was determined, if possible, to find out
      the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as
      soon as he could.

      When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be
      perfectly useless, for, of course, they were to have a son. The
      son was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should
      be of age, and the widow and younger children would by that means
      be provided for. Five daughters successively entered the world,
      but yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many years
      after Lydia’s birth, had been certain that he would. This event
      had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to be
      saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her husband’s
      love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
      income.

      Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs.
      Bennet and the children. But in what proportions it should be
      divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents.
      This was one point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which was now
      to be settled, and Mr. Bennet could have no hesitation in
      acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful
      acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though expressed
      most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
      approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil
      the engagements that had been made for him. He had never before
      supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his
      daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to
      himself as by the present arrangement. He would scarcely be ten
      pounds a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them;
      for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual
      presents in money which passed to her through her mother’s hands,
      Lydia’s expenses had been very little within that sum.

      That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side,
      too, was another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present
      was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When
      the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in
      seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former
      indolence. His letter was soon dispatched; for, though dilatory
      in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution. He begged
      to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his
      brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her.

      The good news spread quickly through the house, and with
      proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in
      the latter with decent philosophy. To be sure, it would have been
      more for the advantage of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come
      upon the town; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded
      from the world, in some distant farmhouse. But there was much to
      be talked of in marrying her; and the good-natured wishes for her
      well-doing which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old
      ladies in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit in this
      change of circumstances, because with such an husband her misery
      was considered certain.

      It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on
      this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table,
      and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a
      damp to her triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been
      the first object of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on
      the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran
      wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new
      carriages, and servants. She was busily searching through the
      neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter, and,
      without knowing or considering what their income might be,
      rejected many as deficient in size and importance.

      “Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings could quit
      it—or the great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger;
      but Ashworth is too far off! I could not bear to have her ten
      miles from me; and as for Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”

      Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
      servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her:
      “Mrs. Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your
      son and daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into
      _one_ house in this neighbourhood they shall never have
      admittance. I will not encourage the impudence of either, by
      receiving them at Longbourn.”

      A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was
      firm. It soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with
      amazement and horror, that her husband would not advance a guinea
      to buy clothes for his daughter. He protested that she should
      receive from him no mark of affection whatever on the occasion.
      Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend it. That his anger could be
      carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse
      his daughter a privilege without which her marriage would
      scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she could believe possible. She
      was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new clothes must
      reflect on her daughter’s nuptials, than to any sense of shame at
      her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they took
      place.

      Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the
      distress of the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted
      with their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so
      shortly give the proper termination to the elopement, they might
      hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who
      were not immediately on the spot.

      She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There
      were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently
      depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge
      of a sister’s frailty would have mortified her so much—not,
      however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to
      herself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf impassable between
      them. Had Lydia’s marriage been concluded on the most honourable
      terms, it was not to be supposed that Mr. Darcy would connect
      himself with a family where, to every other objection, would now
      be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a
      man whom he so justly scorned.

      From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink.
      The wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself
      of his feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation
      survive such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved;
      she repented, though she hardly knew of what. She became jealous
      of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by
      it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance
      of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that she could have
      been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they should
      meet.

      What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that
      the proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago,
      would now have been most gladly and gratefully received! He was
      as generous, she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex;
      but while he was mortal, there must be a triumph.

      She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
      disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding
      and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her
      wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of
      both; by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have been
      softened, his manners improved; and from his judgement,
      information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received
      benefit of greater importance.

      But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude
      what connubial felicity really was. An union of a different
      tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon
      to be formed in their family.

      How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable
      independence, she could not imagine. But how little of permanent
      happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together
      because their passions were stronger than their virtue, she could
      easily conjecture.

      Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet’s
      acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his
      eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and
      concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be
      mentioned to him again. The principal purport of his letter was
      to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved on quitting the
      militia.

      “It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon
      as his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me,
      in considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable,
      both on his account and my niece’s. It is Mr. Wickham’s intention
      to go into the regulars; and among his former friends, there are
      still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army. He
      has the promise of an ensigncy in General ——’s regiment, now
      quartered in the North. It is an advantage to have it so far from
      this part of the kingdom. He promises fairly; and I hope among
      different people, where they may each have a character to
      preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to
      Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and
      to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr.
      Wickham in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment,
      for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the
      trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in
      Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his
      information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at least he
      has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will
      be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment, unless
      they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs.
      Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before
      she leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully
      remembered to you and her mother.—Yours, etc.,

      “E. GARDINER.”

      Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham’s
      removal from the ——shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But
      Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia’s being
      settled in the North, just when she had expected most pleasure
      and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her
      plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe
      disappointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia
      should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted with
      everybody, and had so many favourites.

      “She is so fond of Mrs. Forster,” said she, “it will be quite
      shocking to send her away! And there are several of the young
      men, too, that she likes very much. The officers may not be so
      pleasant in General ——’s regiment.”

      His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being
      admitted into her family again before she set off for the North,
      received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth,
      who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings
      and consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by
      her parents, urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so
      mildly, to receive her and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as
      they were married, that he was prevailed on to think as they
      thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the
      satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show her
      married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was banished to
      the North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore,
      he sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that
      as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to
      Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should
      consent to such a scheme, and had she consulted only her own
      inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object
      of her wishes.




Chapter 51

      Their sister’s wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt
      for her probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was
      sent to meet them at ——, and they were to return in it by
      dinner-time. Their arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets,
      and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings which would
      have attended herself, had _she_ been the culprit, and was
      wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure.

      They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to
      receive them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet as the
      carriage drove up to the door; her husband looked impenetrably
      grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.

      Lydia’s voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown
      open, and she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards,
      embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with
      an affectionate smile, to Wickham, who followed his lady; and
      wished them both joy with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of
      their happiness.

      Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was
      not quite so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity;
      and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young
      couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was
      disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia
      still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned
      from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when
      at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took
      notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a
      laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there.

      Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his
      manners were always so pleasing, that had his character and his
      marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy
      address, while he claimed their relationship, would have
      delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed him quite
      equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within
      herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an
      impudent man. _She_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of
      the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of
      colour.

      There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could
      neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to
      sit near Elizabeth, began enquiring after his acquaintance in
      that neighbourhood, with a good humoured ease which she felt very
      unable to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them to have
      the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was
      recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects
      which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world.

      “Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went
      away; it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been
      things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went
      away, I am sure I had no more idea of being married till I came
      back again! though I thought it would be very good fun if I was.”

      Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth
      looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw
      anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued,
      “Oh! mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I
      was afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in
      his curricle, so I was determined he should know it, and so I let
      down the side-glass next to him, and took off my glove, and let
      my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that he might see the
      ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.”

      Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the
      room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through
      the hall to the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough
      to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s right
      hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister, “Ah! Jane, I take
      your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married
      woman.”

      It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that
      embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first.
      Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs.
      Phillips, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to
      hear herself called “Mrs. Wickham” by each of them; and in the
      mean time, she went after dinner to show her ring, and boast of
      being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.

      “Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the
      breakfast room, “and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a
      charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope
      they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton.
      That is the place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we
      did not all go.”

      “Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I
      don’t at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”

      “Oh, lord! yes;—there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all
      things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us.
      We shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there
      will be some balls, and I will take care to get good partners for
      them all.”

      “I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.

      “And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my
      sisters behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them
      before the winter is over.”

      “I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I
      do not particularly like your way of getting husbands.”

      Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr.
      Wickham had received his commission before he left London, and he
      was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight.

      No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so
      short; and she made the most of the time by visiting about with
      her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home. These
      parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even
      more desirable to such as did think, than such as did not.

      Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had
      expected to find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. She had
      scarcely needed her present observation to be satisfied, from the
      reason of things, that their elopement had been brought on by the
      strength of her love, rather than by his; and she would have
      wondered why, without violently caring for her, he chose to elope
      with her at all, had she not felt certain that his flight was
      rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were
      the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of
      having a companion.

      Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on
      every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He
      did every thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill
      more birds on the first of September, than any body else in the
      country.

      One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with
      her two elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth:

      “Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe.
      You were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it.
      Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?”

      “No really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too
      little said on the subject.”

      “La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We
      were married, you know, at St. Clement’s, because Wickham’s
      lodgings were in that parish. And it was settled that we should
      all be there by eleven o’clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to
      go together; and the others were to meet us at the church. Well,
      Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid,
      you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I
      should have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the
      time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she
      was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in
      ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I
      longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat.”

      “Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would
      never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my
      uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with
      them. If you’ll believe me, I did not once put my foot out of
      doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or scheme,
      or anything. To be sure London was rather thin, but, however, the
      Little Theatre was open. Well, and so just as the carriage came
      to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that
      horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once they get
      together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did
      not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we
      were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But,
      luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all
      set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if he _had_ been
      prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy
      might have done as well.”

      “Mr. Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.

      “Oh, yes!—he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But
      gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word
      about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say?
      It was to be such a secret!”

      “If it was to be secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the
      subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”

      “Oh! certainly,” said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity;
      “we will ask you no questions.”

      “Thank you,” said Lydia, “for if you did, I should certainly tell
      you all, and then Wickham would be angry.”

      On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out
      of her power, by running away.

      But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at
      least it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had
      been at her sister’s wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly
      among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least
      temptation to go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and
      wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none.
      Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the
      noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could not bear such
      suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short
      letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had
      dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
      intended.

      “You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must
      be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and
      (comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have
      been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me
      understand it—unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in
      the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must
      endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance.”

      “Not that I _shall_, though,” she added to herself, as she
      finished the letter; “and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in
      an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and
      stratagems to find it out.”

      Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
      Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was
      glad of it;—till it appeared whether her enquiries would receive
      any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.




Chapter 52

      Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her
      letter as soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in
      possession of it than, hurrying into the little copse, where she
      was least likely to be interrupted, she sat down on one of the
      benches and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter
      convinced her that it did not contain a denial.

      “Gracechurch Street, _Sept_. 6.

      “My dear Niece,

      “I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
      morning to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing
      will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself
      surprised by your application; I did not expect it from _you_.
      Don’t think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know
      that I had not imagined such enquiries to be necessary on _your_
      side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my
      impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am—and nothing
      but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed
      him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and
      ignorant, I must be more explicit.

      “On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had
      a most unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with
      him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my
      curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as _yours_ seems to have
      been. He came to tell Mr. Gardiner that he had found out where
      your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that he had seen and talked
      with them both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can
      collect, he left Derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and
      came to town with the resolution of hunting for them. The motive
      professed was his conviction of its being owing to himself that
      Wickham’s worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it
      impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in
      him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and
      confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his
      private actions open to the world. His character was to speak for
      itself. He called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and
      endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself.
      If he _had another_ motive, I am sure it would never disgrace
      him. He had been some days in town, before he was able to
      discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which
      was more than _we_ had; and the consciousness of this was another
      reason for his resolving to follow us.

      “There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago
      governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on
      some cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She
      then took a large house in Edward-street, and has since
      maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he
      knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he went to her for
      intelligence of him as soon as he got to town. But it was two or
      three days before he could get from her what he wanted. She would
      not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and corruption,
      for she really did know where her friend was to be found. Wickham
      indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and had
      she been able to receive them into her house, they would have
      taken up their abode with her. At length, however, our kind
      friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in —— street.
      He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His
      first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade her
      to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her
      friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her,
      offering his assistance, as far as it would go. But he found
      Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared
      for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not
      hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some
      time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were
      her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and
      expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with
      Wickham, he easily learnt had never been _his_ design. He
      confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment, on account of
      some debts of honour, which were very pressing; and scrupled not
      to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia’s flight on her own
      folly alone. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and
      as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about
      it. He must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew
      he should have nothing to live on.

      “Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once.
      Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have
      been able to do something for him, and his situation must have
      been benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this
      question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of more
      effectually making his fortune by marriage in some other country.
      Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof
      against the temptation of immediate relief.

      “They met several times, for there was much to be discussed.
      Wickham of course wanted more than he could get; but at length
      was reduced to be reasonable.

      “Everything being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy’s next step
      was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in
      Gracechurch street the evening before I came home. But Mr.
      Gardiner could not be seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further
      enquiry, that your father was still with him, but would quit town
      the next morning. He did not judge your father to be a person
      whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore
      readily postponed seeing him till after the departure of the
      former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day it was
      only known that a gentleman had called on business.

      “On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at
      home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk
      together.

      “They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It was not
      all settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was
      sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I
      fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character,
      after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times,
      but _this_ is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did
      not do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be
      thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your uncle would most
      readily have settled the whole.

      “They battled it together for a long time, which was more than
      either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at
      last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed
      to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up with only having
      the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain;
      and I really believe your letter this morning gave him great
      pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob him
      of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due.
      But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at
      most.

      “You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the
      young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to
      considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in
      addition to her own settled upon _her_, and his commission
      purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by him alone,
      was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his
      reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s
      character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had
      been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth
      in _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody’s_
      reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all
      this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured
      that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him
      credit for _another interest_ in the affair.

      “When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends,
      who were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he
      should be in London once more when the wedding took place, and
      all money matters were then to receive the last finish.

      “I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation
      which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least
      it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and
      Wickham had constant admission to the house. _He_ was exactly
      what he had been, when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would
      not tell you how little I was satisfied with _her_ behaviour
      while she staid with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane’s letter
      last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a
      piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no
      fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious
      manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had
      done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If
      she heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not
      listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my
      dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with
      her.

      “Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you,
      attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to
      leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry
      with me, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying
      (what I was never bold enough to say before) how much I like him.
      His behaviour to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as
      when we were in Derbyshire. His understanding and opinions all
      please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and
      _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his wife may teach him. I
      thought him very sly;—he hardly ever mentioned your name. But
      slyness seems the fashion.

      “Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do
      not punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be
      quite happy till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton,
      with a nice little pair of ponies, would be the very thing.

      “But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this
      half hour.

      “Yours, very sincerely,
      “M. GARDINER.”

      The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of
      spirits, in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure
      or pain bore the greatest share. The vague and unsettled
      suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Mr. Darcy might
      have been doing to forward her sister’s match, which she had
      feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be
      probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain
      of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be
      true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on
      himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a
      research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman
      whom he must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to
      meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe,
      the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose very name
      it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had done all this for a
      girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her heart did
      whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a hope shortly
      checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her
      vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection
      for her—for a woman who had already refused him—as able to
      overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against
      relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law of Wickham! Every kind
      of pride must revolt from the connection. He had, to be sure,
      done much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had given a
      reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary stretch
      of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he had been
      wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it;
      and though she would not place herself as his principal
      inducement, she could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality
      for her might assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of
      mind must be materially concerned. It was painful, exceedingly
      painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who
      could never receive a return. They owed the restoration of Lydia,
      her character, every thing, to him. Oh! how heartily did she
      grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged,
      every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For herself
      she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a cause
      of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of
      himself. She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again and
      again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even
      sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding
      how steadfastly both she and her uncle had been persuaded that
      affection and confidence subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.

      She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one’s
      approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was
      overtaken by Wickham.

      “I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?”
      said he, as he joined her.

      “You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not
      follow that the interruption must be unwelcome.”

      “I should be sorry indeed, if it were. _We_ were always good
      friends; and now we are better.”

      “True. Are the others coming out?”

      “I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage
      to Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and
      aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley.”

      She replied in the affirmative.

      “I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be
      too much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle.
      And you saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she
      was always very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my
      name to you.”

      “Yes, she did.”

      “And what did she say?”

      “That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had—not
      turned out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things
      are strangely misrepresented.”

      “Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had
      silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:

      “I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each
      other several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”

      “Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,” said
      Elizabeth. “It must be something particular, to take him there at
      this time of year.”

      “Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I
      thought I understood from the Gardiners that you had.”

      “Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”

      “And do you like her?”

      “Very much.”

      “I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within
      this year or two. When I last saw her, she was not very
      promising. I am very glad you liked her. I hope she will turn out
      well.”

      “I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”

      “Did you go by the village of Kympton?”

      “I do not recollect that we did.”

      “I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have
      had. A most delightful place!—Excellent Parsonage House! It would
      have suited me in every respect.”

      “How should you have liked making sermons?”

      “Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my
      duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought
      not to repine;—but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing
      for me! The quiet, the retirement of such a life would have
      answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you
      ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when you were in Kent?”

      “I _have_ heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that
      it was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the
      present patron.”

      “You have. Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from
      the first, you may remember.”

      “I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was
      not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you
      actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and
      that the business had been compromised accordingly.”

      “You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may
      remember what I told you on that point, when first we talked of
      it.”

      They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked
      fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to
      provoke him, she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:

      “Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not
      let us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be
      always of one mind.”

      She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry,
      though he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.




Chapter 53

      Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation
      that he never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear
      sister Elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and she was
      pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet.

      The day of his and Lydia’s departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet
      was forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no
      means entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle,
      was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth.

      “Oh! my dear Lydia,” she cried, “when shall we meet again?”

      “Oh, lord! I don’t know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.”

      “Write to me very often, my dear.”

      “As often as I can. But you know married women have never much
      time for writing. My sisters may write to _me_. They will have
      nothing else to do.”

      Mr. Wickham’s adieus were much more affectionate than his wife’s.
      He smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.

      “He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were
      out of the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and
      makes love to us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even
      Sir William Lucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”

      The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several
      days.

      “I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as
      parting with one’s friends. One seems so forlorn without them.”

      “This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a
      daughter,” said Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied
      that your other four are single.”

      “It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is
      married, but only because her husband’s regiment happens to be so
      far off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so
      soon.”

      But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was
      shortly relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of
      hope, by an article of news which then began to be in
      circulation. The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders
      to prepare for the arrival of her master, who was coming down in
      a day or two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mrs. Bennet was
      quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and smiled and shook
      her head by turns.

      “Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,” (for
      Mrs. Phillips first brought her the news). “Well, so much the
      better. Not that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us,
      you know, and I am sure I never want to see him again. But,
      however, he is very welcome to come to Netherfield, if he likes
      it. And who knows what _may_ happen? But that is nothing to us.
      You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention a word
      about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?”

      “You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. Nicholls was
      in Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself
      on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was
      certain true. He comes down on Thursday at the latest, very
      likely on Wednesday. She was going to the butcher’s, she told me,
      on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday, and she has got
      three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.”

      Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without
      changing colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his
      name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together,
      she said:

      “I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the
      present report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don’t
      imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the
      moment, because I felt that I _should_ be looked at. I do assure
      you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or
      pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes alone; because we
      shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of _myself_, but
      I dread other people’s remarks.”

      Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him
      in Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming
      there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but she
      still thought him partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the
      greater probability of his coming there _with_ his friend’s
      permission, or being bold enough to come without it.

      “Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “that this poor man
      cannot come to a house which he has legally hired, without
      raising all this speculation! I _will_ leave him to himself.”

      In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be
      her feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could
      easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were
      more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them.

      The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their
      parents, about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.

      “As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet,
      “you will wait on him of course.”

      “No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised,
      if I went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it
      ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand
      again.”

      His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an
      attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his
      returning to Netherfield.

      “’Tis an _etiquette_ I despise,” said he. “If he wants our
      society, let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not
      spend _my_ hours in running after my neighbours every time they
      go away and come back again.”

      “Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do
      not wait on him. But, however, that shan’t prevent my asking him
      to dine here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the
      Gouldings soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there
      will be just room at table for him.”

      Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
      husband’s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that
      her neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it,
      before _they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,—

      “I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her
      sister. “It would be nothing; I could see him with perfect
      indifference, but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually
      talked of. My mother means well; but she does not know, no one
      can know, how much I suffer from what she says. Happy shall I be,
      when his stay at Netherfield is over!”

      “I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” replied Elizabeth;
      “but it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the
      usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied
      me, because you have always so much.”

      Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of
      servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the
      period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side might be as long as
      it could. She counted the days that must intervene before their
      invitation could be sent; hopeless of seeing him before. But on
      the third morning after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw
      him, from her dressing-room window, enter the paddock and ride
      towards the house.

      Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane
      resolutely kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy
      her mother, went to the window—she looked,—she saw Mr. Darcy with
      him, and sat down again by her sister.

      “There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it
      be?”

      “Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do
      not know.”

      “La!” replied Kitty, “it looks just like that man that used to be
      with him before. Mr. what’s-his-name. That tall, proud man.”

      “Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!—and so it does, I vow. Well, any
      friend of Mr. Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure;
      but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him.”

      Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but
      little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the
      awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost
      for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter. Both
      sisters were uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and
      of course for themselves; and their mother talked on, of her
      dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be civil to him only
      as Mr. Bingley’s friend, without being heard by either of them.
      But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be
      suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew
      Mrs. Gardiner’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment
      towards him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she
      had refused, and whose merit she had undervalued; but to her own
      more extensive information, he was the person to whom the whole
      family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she
      regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at
      least as reasonable and just as what Jane felt for Bingley. Her
      astonishment at his coming—at his coming to Netherfield, to
      Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to
      what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in
      Derbyshire.

      The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half
      a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added
      lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that
      his affection and wishes must still be unshaken. But she would
      not be secure.

      “Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “it will then be
      early enough for expectation.”

      She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without
      daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them
      to the face of her sister as the servant was approaching the
      door. Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than
      Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen’s appearing, her colour
      increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a
      propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of
      resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.

      Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and
      sat down again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not
      often command. She had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He
      looked serious, as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been
      used to look in Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at
      Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother’s presence be
      what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but not
      an improbable, conjecture.

      Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short
      period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was
      received by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her
      two daughters ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold
      and ceremonious politeness of her curtsey and address to his
      friend.

      Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the
      latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from
      irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful
      degree by a distinction so ill applied.

      Darcy, after enquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a
      question which she could not answer without confusion, said
      scarcely anything. He was not seated by her; perhaps that was the
      reason of his silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire.
      There he had talked to her friends, when he could not to herself.
      But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of his
      voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of
      curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often found
      him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object
      but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please,
      than when they last met, were plainly expressed. She was
      disappointed, and angry with herself for being so.

      “Could I expect it to be otherwise!” said she. “Yet why did he
      come?”

      She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself;
      and to him she had hardly courage to speak.

      She enquired after his sister, but could do no more.

      “It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,” said Mrs.
      Bennet.

      He readily agreed to it.

      “I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People
      _did_ say you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas;
      but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have
      happened in the neighbourhood, since you went away. Miss Lucas is
      married and settled. And one of my own daughters. I suppose you
      have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It
      was in The Times and The Courier, I know; though it was not put
      in as it ought to be. It was only said, ‘Lately, George Wickham,
      Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a syllable said
      of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything. It was
      my brother Gardiner’s drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to
      make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?”

      Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations.
      Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked,
      therefore, she could not tell.

      “It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well
      married,” continued her mother, “but at the same time, Mr.
      Bingley, it is very hard to have her taken such a way from me.
      They are gone down to Newcastle, a place quite northward, it
      seems, and there they are to stay I do not know how long. His
      regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of his leaving
      the ——shire, and of his being gone into the regulars. Thank
      Heaven! he has _some_ friends, though perhaps not so many as he
      deserves.”

      Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such
      misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew
      from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else
      had so effectually done before; and she asked Bingley whether he
      meant to make any stay in the country at present. A few weeks, he
      believed.

      “When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,” said her
      mother, “I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you
      please on Mr. Bennet’s manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy
      to oblige you, and will save all the best of the covies for you.”

      Elizabeth’s misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious
      attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had
      flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would
      be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant,
      she felt that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself
      amends for moments of such painful confusion.

      “The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more
      to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no
      pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me
      never see either one or the other again!”

      Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
      compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from
      observing how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the
      admiration of her former lover. When first he came in, he had
      spoken to her but little; but every five minutes seemed to be
      giving her more of his attention. He found her as handsome as she
      had been last year; as good natured, and as unaffected, though
      not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no difference should
      be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded that she
      talked as much as ever. But her mind was so busily engaged, that
      she did not always know when she was silent.

      When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of
      her intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine
      at Longbourn in a few days time.

      “You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley,” she added, “for
      when you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family
      dinner with us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you
      see; and I assure you, I was very much disappointed that you did
      not come back and keep your engagement.”

      Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said
      something of his concern at having been prevented by business.
      They then went away.

      Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and
      dine there that day; but, though she always kept a very good
      table, she did not think anything less than two courses could be
      good enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or
      satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a
      year.




Chapter 54

      As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her
      spirits; or in other words, to dwell without interruption on
      those subjects that must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy’s behaviour
      astonished and vexed her.

      “Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said
      she, “did he come at all?”

      She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.

      “He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt,
      when he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come
      hither? If he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing,
      teasing, man! I will think no more about him.”

      Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the
      approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look,
      which showed her better satisfied with their visitors, than
      Elizabeth.

      “Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel
      perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be
      embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on
      Tuesday. It will then be publicly seen that, on both sides, we
      meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance.”

      “Yes, very indifferent indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. “Oh,
      Jane, take care.”

      “My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger
      now?”

      “I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in
      love with you as ever.”

      They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs.
      Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy
      schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley,
      in half an hour’s visit, had revived.

      On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and
      the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their
      punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they
      repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see
      whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former
      parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother,
      occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by
      herself. On entering the room, he seemed to hesitate; but Jane
      happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He
      placed himself by her.

      Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his
      friend. He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have
      imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had
      she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an
      expression of half-laughing alarm.

      His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as
      showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than
      formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself,
      Jane’s happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though
      she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received
      pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the
      animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no
      cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the
      table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She
      knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either,
      or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to
      hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they
      spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner
      whenever they did. Her mother’s ungraciousness, made the sense of
      what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind; and she
      would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell him
      that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of
      the family.

      She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity
      of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not
      pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of
      conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his
      entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the
      drawing-room, before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull
      to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to
      their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure
      for the evening must depend.

      “If he does not come to me, _then_,” said she, “I shall give him
      up for ever.”

      The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have
      answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the
      table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring
      out the coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a
      single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the
      gentlemen’s approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her
      than ever, and said, in a whisper:

      “The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. We want none
      of them; do we?”

      Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed
      him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely
      patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged
      against herself for being so silly!

      “A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish
      enough to expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the
      sex, who would not protest against such a weakness as a second
      proposal to the same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to
      their feelings!”

      She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his
      coffee cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:

      “Is your sister at Pemberley still?”

      “Yes, she will remain there till Christmas.”

      “And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?”

      “Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to
      Scarborough, these three weeks.”

      She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to
      converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her,
      however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young
      lady’s whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

      When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the
      ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined
      by him, when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a
      victim to her mother’s rapacity for whist players, and in a few
      moments after seated with the rest of the party. She now lost
      every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening
      at different tables, and she had nothing to hope, but that his
      eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to
      make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.

      Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
      supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of
      the others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.

      “Well girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves,
      “What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off
      uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as
      any I ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn—and everybody
      said they never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times
      better than what we had at the Lucases’ last week; and even Mr.
      Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges were remarkably well
      done; and I suppose he has two or three French cooks at least.
      And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater beauty. Mrs.
      Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And what
      do you think she said besides? ‘Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have
      her at Netherfield at last.’ She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long
      is as good a creature as ever lived—and her nieces are very
      pretty behaved girls, and not at all handsome: I like them
      prodigiously.”

      Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen
      enough of Bingley’s behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she
      would get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her
      family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that
      she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next
      day, to make his proposals.

      “It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to
      Elizabeth. “The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one
      with the other. I hope we may often meet again.”

      Elizabeth smiled.

      “Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies
      me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation
      as an agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish
      beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now
      are, that he never had any design of engaging my affection. It is
      only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a
      stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.”

      “You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me
      smile, and are provoking me to it every moment.”

      “How hard it is in some cases to be believed!”

      “And how impossible in others!”

      “But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
      acknowledge?”

      “That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all
      love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth
      knowing. Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not
      make _me_ your confidante.”




Chapter 55

      A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone.
      His friend had left him that morning for London, but was to
      return home in ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and
      was in remarkably good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine
      with them; but, with many expressions of concern, he confessed
      himself engaged elsewhere.

      “Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.”

      He should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if
      she would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of
      waiting on them.

      “Can you come to-morrow?”

      Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her
      invitation was accepted with alacrity.

      He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of
      them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughter’s room, in her
      dressing gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out:

      “My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come—Mr. Bingley
      is come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come
      to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never
      mind Miss Lizzy’s hair.”

      “We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say
      Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half
      an hour ago.”

      “Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be
      quick! Where is your sash, my dear?”

      But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to
      go down without one of her sisters.

      The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in
      the evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was
      his custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two
      obstacles of the five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking
      and winking at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time,
      without making any impression on them. Elizabeth would not
      observe her; and when at last Kitty did, she very innocently
      said, “What is the matter mamma? What do you keep winking at me
      for? What am I to do?”

      “Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat
      still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious
      occasion, she suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, “Come here,
      my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane
      instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at
      such premeditation, and her entreaty that _she_ would not give in
      to it. In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half-opened the door and
      called out:

      “Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”

      Elizabeth was forced to go.

      “We may as well leave them by themselves you know;” said her
      mother, as soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going up
      stairs to sit in my dressing-room.”

      Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
      quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then
      returned into the drawing-room.

      Mrs. Bennet’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was
      every thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her
      daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable
      addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged
      officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with
      a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to
      the daughter.

      He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he
      went away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and
      Mrs. Bennet’s means, for his coming next morning to shoot with
      her husband.

      After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word
      passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went
      to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded,
      unless Mr. Darcy returned within the stated time. Seriously,
      however, she felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have
      taken place with that gentleman’s concurrence.

      Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet
      spent the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was
      much more agreeable than his companion expected. There was
      nothing of presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke his
      ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more
      communicative, and less eccentric, than the other had ever seen
      him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the
      evening Mrs. Bennet’s invention was again at work to get every
      body away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter
      to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon
      after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards,
      she could not be wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes.

      But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was
      finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to
      fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening
      the door, she perceived her sister and Bingley standing together
      over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had
      this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily
      turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it
      all. _Their_ situation was awkward enough; but _hers_ she thought
      was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and
      Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who
      as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering
      a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.

      Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence
      would give pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged,
      with the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in
      the world.

      “’Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve
      it. Oh! why is not everybody as happy?”

      Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a
      warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every
      sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But
      she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half
      that remained to be said for the present.

      “I must go instantly to my mother;” she cried. “I would not on
      any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her
      to hear it from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father
      already. Oh! Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give
      such pleasure to all my dear family! how shall I bear so much
      happiness!”

      She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up
      the card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.

      Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity
      and ease with which an affair was finally settled, that had given
      them so many previous months of suspense and vexation.

      “And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious
      circumspection! of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance!
      the happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!”

      In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with
      her father had been short and to the purpose.

      “Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door.

      “With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare
      say.”

      He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good
      wishes and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily
      expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They
      shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister came
      down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own
      happiness, and of Jane’s perfections; and in spite of his being a
      lover, Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity
      to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the
      excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of Jane,
      and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and
      himself.

      It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the
      satisfaction of Miss Bennet’s mind gave a glow of such sweet
      animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever.
      Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon.
      Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent or speak her approbation
      in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked
      to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when Mr. Bennet
      joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how
      really happy he was.

      Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till
      their visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was
      gone, he turned to his daughter, and said:

      “Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.”

      Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
      goodness.

      “You are a good girl;” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in
      thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of
      your doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means
      unlike. You are each of you so complying, that nothing will ever
      be resolved on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and
      so generous, that you will always exceed your income.”

      “I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters
      would be unpardonable in _me_.”

      “Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what
      are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and
      very likely more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh! my dear,
      dear Jane, I am so happy! I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep
      all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must be so,
      at last. I was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing! I
      remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when he first came into
      Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that you
      should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that
      ever was seen!”

      Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition
      her favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her
      younger sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects
      of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense.

      Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and
      Kitty begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.

      Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at
      Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always
      remaining till after supper; unless when some barbarous
      neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an
      invitation to dinner which he thought himself obliged to accept.

      Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her
      sister; for while he was present, Jane had no attention to bestow
      on anyone else; but she found herself considerably useful to both
      of them in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur.
      In the absence of Jane, he always attached himself to Elizabeth,
      for the pleasure of talking of her; and when Bingley was gone,
      Jane constantly sought the same means of relief.

      “He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me
      that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I
      had not believed it possible.”

      “I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account
      for it?”

      “It must have been his sister’s doing. They were certainly no
      friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at,
      since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many
      respects. But when they see, as I trust they will, that their
      brother is happy with me, they will learn to be contented, and we
      shall be on good terms again; though we can never be what we once
      were to each other.”

      “That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I
      ever heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see
      you again the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.”

      “Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last
      November, he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of
      _my_ being indifferent would have prevented his coming down
      again!”

      “He made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of
      his modesty.”

      This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his
      diffidence, and the little value he put on his own good
      qualities. Elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed
      the interference of his friend; for, though Jane had the most
      generous and forgiving heart in the world, she knew it was a
      circumstance which must prejudice her against him.

      “I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!”
      cried Jane. “Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and
      blessed above them all! If I could but see you as happy! If there
      were but such another man for you!”

      “If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy
      as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can
      have your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and,
      perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Mr.
      Collins in time.”

      The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be
      long a secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs.
      Phillips, and she ventured, without any permission, to do the
      same by all her neighbours in Meryton.

      The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in
      the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first
      run away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for
      misfortune.




Chapter 56

      One morning, about a week after Bingley’s engagement with Jane
      had been formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting
      together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn
      to the window, by the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a
      chaise and four driving up the lawn. It was too early in the
      morning for visitors, and besides, the equipage did not answer to
      that of any of their neighbours. The horses were post; and
      neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who preceded
      it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that
      somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet
      to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with
      him into the shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of
      the remaining three continued, though with little satisfaction,
      till the door was thrown open and their visitor entered. It was
      Lady Catherine de Bourgh.

      They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
      astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of
      Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them,
      even inferior to what Elizabeth felt.

      She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious,
      made no other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight
      inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word.
      Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her ladyship’s
      entrance, though no request of introduction had been made.

      Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of
      such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness.
      After sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to
      Elizabeth,

      “I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your
      mother.”

      Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.

      “And _that_ I suppose is one of your sisters.”

      “Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to Lady
      Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all
      is lately married, and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds,
      walking with a young man who, I believe, will soon become a part
      of the family.”

      “You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine after
      a short silence.

      “It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but
      I assure you it is much larger than Sir William Lucas’s.”

      “This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening,
      in summer; the windows are full west.”

      Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner,
      and then added:

      “May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left
      Mr. and Mrs. Collins well.”

      “Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”

      Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her
      from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her
      calling. But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.

      Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take
      some refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not
      very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up,
      said to Elizabeth,

      “Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little
      wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a
      turn in it, if you will favour me with your company.”

      “Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her ladyship about the
      different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”

      Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol,
      attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the
      hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
      drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be
      decent looking rooms, walked on.

      Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
      waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the
      gravel walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to
      make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more
      than usually insolent and disagreeable.

      “How could I ever think her like her nephew?” said she, as she
      looked in her face.

      As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the
      following manner:—

      “You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of
      my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell
      you why I come.”

      Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

      “Indeed, you are mistaken, Madam. I have not been at all able to
      account for the honour of seeing you here.”

      “Miss Bennet,” replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought
      to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere
      _you_ may choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character
      has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in
      a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from
      it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me two days ago. I
      was told that not only your sister was on the point of being most
      advantageously married, but that you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet,
      would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to my nephew,
      my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I _know_ it must be a scandalous
      falsehood, though I would not injure him so much as to suppose
      the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for
      this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”

      “If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth,
      colouring with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the
      trouble of coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by
      it?”

      “At once to insist upon having such a report universally
      contradicted.”

      “Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said
      Elizabeth coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it; if,
      indeed, such a report is in existence.”

      “If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
      industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such
      a report is spread abroad?”

      “I never heard that it was.”

      “And can you likewise declare, that there is no _foundation_ for
      it?”

      “I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship.
      _You_ may ask questions which _I_ shall not choose to answer.”

      “This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being
      satisfied. Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”

      “Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.”

      “It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of
      his reason. But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of
      infatuation, have made him forget what he owes to himself and to
      all his family. You may have drawn him in.”

      “If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”

      “Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to
      such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in
      the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”

      “But you are not entitled to know _mine;_ nor will such behaviour
      as this, ever induce me to be explicit.”

      “Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
      presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy
      is engaged to _my daughter_. Now what have you to say?”

      “Only this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose
      he will make an offer to me.”

      Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:

      “The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their
      infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the
      favourite wish of _his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in
      their cradles, we planned the union: and now, at the moment when
      the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished in their
      marriage, to be prevented by a young woman of inferior birth, of
      no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family! Do
      you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his tacit
      engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of
      propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his
      earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?”

      “Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there
      is no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall
      certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt
      wished him to marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you
      could in planning the marriage. Its completion depended on
      others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by honour nor inclination
      confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice? And
      if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”

      “Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it.
      Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by
      his family or friends, if you wilfully act against the
      inclinations of all. You will be censured, slighted, and
      despised, by everyone connected with him. Your alliance will be a
      disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us.”

      “These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But the wife
      of Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness
      necessarily attached to her situation, that she could, upon the
      whole, have no cause to repine.”

      “Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your
      gratitude for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to
      me on that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss
      Bennet, that I came here with the determined resolution of
      carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it. I have not
      been used to submit to any person’s whims. I have not been in the
      habit of brooking disappointment.”

      “_That_ will make your ladyship’s situation at present more
      pitiable; but it will have no effect on _me_.”

      “I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and
      my nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the
      maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the father’s,
      from respectable, honourable, and ancient—though
      untitled—families. Their fortune on both sides is splendid. They
      are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their
      respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart
      pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or
      fortune. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If
      you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit
      the sphere in which you have been brought up.”

      “In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as
      quitting that sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman’s
      daughter; so far we are equal.”

      “True. You _are_ a gentleman’s daughter. But who was your mother?
      Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of
      their condition.”

      “Whatever my connections may be,” said Elizabeth, “if your nephew
      does not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.”

      “Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?”

      Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
      Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say,
      after a moment’s deliberation:

      “I am not.”

      Lady Catherine seemed pleased.

      “And will you promise me, never to enter into such an
      engagement?”

      “I will make no promise of the kind.”

      “Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a
      more reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a
      belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have
      given me the assurance I require.”

      “And I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be
      intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship
      wants Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter; but would my giving you
      the wished-for promise make _their_ marriage at all more
      probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would _my_ refusing
      to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin?
      Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which
      you have supported this extraordinary application have been as
      frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely
      mistaken my character, if you think I can be worked on by such
      persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your
      interference in _his_ affairs, I cannot tell; but you have
      certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg,
      therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject.”

      “Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
      objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I
      am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister’s
      infamous elopement. I know it all; that the young man’s marrying
      her was a patched-up business, at the expence of your father and
      uncles. And is _such_ a girl to be my nephew’s sister? Is _her_
      husband, who is the son of his late father’s steward, to be his
      brother? Heaven and earth!—of what are you thinking? Are the
      shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”

      “You can _now_ have nothing further to say,” she resentfully
      answered. “You have insulted me in every possible method. I must
      beg to return to the house.”

      And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they
      turned back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.

      “You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my
      nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a
      connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”

      “Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my
      sentiments.”

      “You are then resolved to have him?”

      “I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that
      manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness,
      without reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly
      unconnected with me.”

      “It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey
      the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to
      ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the
      contempt of the world.”

      “Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth,
      “have any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No
      principle of either would be violated by my marriage with Mr.
      Darcy. And with regard to the resentment of his family, or the
      indignation of the world, if the former _were_ excited by his
      marrying me, it would not give me one moment’s concern—and the
      world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn.”

      “And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very
      well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet,
      that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I
      hoped to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry
      my point.”

      In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the
      door of the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, “I
      take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your
      mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously
      displeased.”

      Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
      ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it
      herself. She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up
      stairs. Her mother impatiently met her at the door of the
      dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again
      and rest herself.

      “She did not choose it,” said her daughter, “she would go.”

      “She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was
      prodigiously civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the
      Collinses were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say,
      and so, passing through Meryton, thought she might as well call
      on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you,
      Lizzy?”

      Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to
      acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.




Chapter 57

      The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
      Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for
      many hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady
      Catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this
      journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of breaking off her
      supposed engagement with Mr. Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to
      be sure! but from what the report of their engagement could
      originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till she
      recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley, and
      _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
      expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to
      supply the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the
      marriage of her sister must bring them more frequently together.
      And her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their
      communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had
      reached Lady Catherine), had only set _that_ down as almost
      certain and immediate, which _she_ had looked forward to as
      possible at some future time.

      In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not
      help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of
      her persisting in this interference. From what she had said of
      her resolution to prevent their marriage, it occurred to
      Elizabeth that she must meditate an application to her nephew;
      and how he might take a similar representation of the evils
      attached to a connection with her, she dared not pronounce. She
      knew not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt, or his
      dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose that he
      thought much higher of her ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
      was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with
      _one_, whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own,
      his aunt would address him on his weakest side. With his notions
      of dignity, he would probably feel that the arguments, which to
      Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good
      sense and solid reasoning.

      If he had been wavering before as to what he should do, which had
      often seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a
      relation might settle every doubt, and determine him at once to
      be as happy as dignity unblemished could make him. In that case
      he would return no more. Lady Catherine might see him in her way
      through town; and his engagement to Bingley of coming again to
      Netherfield must give way.

      “If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come
      to his friend within a few days,” she added, “I shall know how to
      understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every
      wish of his constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting
      me, when he might have obtained my affections and hand, I shall
      soon cease to regret him at all.”

      The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their
      visitor had been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied
      it, with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs.
      Bennet’s curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on
      the subject.

      The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her
      father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.

      “Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you; come into my
      room.”

      She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had
      to tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in
      some manner connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck
      her that it might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated
      with dismay all the consequent explanations.

      She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat
      down. He then said,

      “I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
      exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to
      know its contents. I did not know before, that I had _two_
      daughters on the brink of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a
      very important conquest.”

      The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the
      instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew,
      instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be
      pleased that he explained himself at all, or offended that his
      letter was not rather addressed to herself; when her father
      continued:

      “You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such
      matters as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity, to
      discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr.
      Collins.”

      “From Mr. Collins! and what can _he_ have to say?”

      “Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with
      congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest
      daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the
      good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your
      impatience, by reading what he says on that point. What relates
      to yourself, is as follows: ‘Having thus offered you the sincere
      congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on this happy event,
      let me now add a short hint on the subject of another; of which
      we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter
      Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet,
      after her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of
      her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most
      illustrious personages in this land.’

      “Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? ‘This young
      gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the
      heart of mortal can most desire,—splendid property, noble
      kindred, and extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these
      temptations, let me warn my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of
      what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this
      gentleman’s proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined to
      take immediate advantage of.’

      “Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it
      comes out:

      “‘My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to
      imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on
      the match with a friendly eye.’

      “_Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
      surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man
      within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have
      given the lie more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy,
      who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and who
      probably never looked at _you_ in his life! It is admirable!”

      Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could
      only force one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been
      directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.

      “Are you not diverted?”

      “Oh! yes. Pray read on.”

      “‘After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her
      ladyship last night, she immediately, with her usual
      condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it
      became apparent, that on the score of some family objections on
      the part of my cousin, she would never give her consent to what
      she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give
      the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and her
      noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
      hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.’
      Mr. Collins moreover adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that my cousin
      Lydia’s sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only
      concerned that their living together before the marriage took
      place should be so generally known. I must not, however, neglect
      the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement
      at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as
      soon as they were married. It was an encouragement of vice; and
      had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should very strenuously
      have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them, as a
      Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
      names to be mentioned in your hearing.’ _That_ is his notion of
      Christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his
      dear Charlotte’s situation, and his expectation of a young
      olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it.
      You are not going to be _missish_, I hope, and pretend to be
      affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make
      sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?”

      “Oh!” cried Elizabeth, “I am excessively diverted. But it is so
      strange!”

      “Yes—_that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other
      man it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference,
      and _your_ pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much
      as I abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins’s
      correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter
      of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over
      Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my
      son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about this
      report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”

      To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as
      it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not
      distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at
      a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not. It was
      necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cried. Her father
      had most cruelly mortified her, by what he said of Mr. Darcy’s
      indifference, and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want
      of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of his seeing too
      _little_, she might have fancied too _much_.




Chapter 58

      Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend,
      as Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to
      bring Darcy with him to Longbourn before many days had passed
      after Lady Catherine’s visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and,
      before Mrs. Bennet had time to tell him of their having seen his
      aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who
      wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It
      was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the habit of walking; Mary
      could never spare time; but the remaining five set off together.
      Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip
      them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were
      to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty
      was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly
      forming a desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the
      same.

      They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call
      upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a
      general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him
      alone. Now was the moment for her resolution to be executed, and,
      while her courage was high, she immediately said:

      “Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of
      giving relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be
      wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your
      unexampled kindness to my poor sister. Ever since I have known
      it, I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully
      I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I should not
      have merely my own gratitude to express.”

      “I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of
      surprise and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what
      may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not
      think Mrs. Gardiner was so little to be trusted.”

      “You must not blame my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first
      betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of
      course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me
      thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that
      generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble,
      and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering
      them.”

      “If you _will_ thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself
      alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force
      to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to
      deny. But your _family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I
      believe I thought only of _you_.”

      Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short
      pause, her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with
      me. If your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me
      so at once. _My_ affections and wishes are unchanged, but one
      word from you will silence me on this subject for ever.”

      Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and
      anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak; and
      immediately, though not very fluently, gave him to understand
      that her sentiments had undergone so material a change, since the
      period to which he alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude
      and pleasure his present assurances. The happiness which this
      reply produced, was such as he had probably never felt before;
      and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
      warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had
      Elizabeth been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how
      well the expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over his face,
      became him; but, though she could not look, she could listen, and
      he told her of feelings, which, in proving of what importance she
      was to him, made his affection every moment more valuable.

      They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too
      much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any
      other objects. She soon learnt that they were indebted for their
      present good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who _did_
      call on him in her return through London, and there relate her
      journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her
      conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every
      expression of the latter which, in her ladyship’s apprehension,
      peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief
      that such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that
      promise from her nephew which _she_ had refused to give. But,
      unluckily for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly
      contrariwise.

      “It taught me to hope,” said he, “as I had scarcely ever allowed
      myself to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be
      certain that, had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided
      against me, you would have acknowledged it to Lady Catherine,
      frankly and openly.”

      Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, “Yes, you know
      enough of my _frankness_ to believe me capable of _that_. After
      abusing you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple
      in abusing you to all your relations.”

      “What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your
      accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my
      behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It
      was unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.”

      “We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to
      that evening,” said Elizabeth. “The conduct of neither, if
      strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but since then, we
      have both, I hope, improved in civility.”

      “I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of
      what I then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions
      during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months,
      inexpressibly painful to me. Your reproof, so well applied, I
      shall never forget: ‘had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike
      manner.’ Those were your words. You know not, you can scarcely
      conceive, how they have tortured me;—though it was some time, I
      confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.”

      “I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong
      an impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever
      felt in such a way.”

      “I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every
      proper feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I
      shall never forget, as you said that I could not have addressed
      you in any possible way that would induce you to accept me.”

      “Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not
      do at all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily
      ashamed of it.”

      Darcy mentioned his letter. “Did it,” said he, “did it soon make
      you think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit
      to its contents?”

      She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually
      all her former prejudices had been removed.

      “I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give you pain, but it
      was necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was
      one part especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your
      having the power of reading again. I can remember some
      expressions which might justly make you hate me.”

      “The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential
      to the preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason
      to think my opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I
      hope, quite so easily changed as that implies.”

      “When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself
      perfectly calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was
      written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit.”

      “The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so.
      The adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The
      feelings of the person who wrote, and the person who received it,
      are now so widely different from what they were then, that every
      unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You
      must learn some of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its
      remembrance gives you pleasure.”

      “I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. _Your_
      retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the
      contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is
      much better, of innocence. But with _me_, it is not so. Painful
      recollections will intrude which cannot, which ought not, to be
      repelled. I have been a selfish being all my life, in practice,
      though not in principle. As a child I was taught what was
      _right_, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was given
      good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
      Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only _child_), I was
      spoilt by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father,
      particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable), allowed,
      encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing; to
      care for none beyond my own family circle; to think meanly of all
      the rest of the world; to _wish_ at least to think meanly of
      their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I was, from
      eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still have been but
      for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You
      taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous.
      By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of
      my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my
      pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”

      “Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”

      “Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you
      to be wishing, expecting my addresses.”

      “My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I
      assure you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might
      often lead me wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_
      evening?”

      “Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began
      to take a proper direction.”

      “I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met
      at Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?”

      “No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise.”

      “Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed
      by you. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary
      politeness, and I confess that I did not expect to receive _more_
      than my due.”

      “My object _then_,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every
      civility in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the
      past; and I hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill
      opinion, by letting you see that your reproofs had been attended
      to. How soon any other wishes introduced themselves I can hardly
      tell, but I believe in about half an hour after I had seen you.”

      He then told her of Georgiana’s delight in her acquaintance, and
      of her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally
      leading to the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that
      his resolution of following her from Derbyshire in quest of her
      sister had been formed before he quitted the inn, and that his
      gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other
      struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend.

      She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a
      subject to each, to be dwelt on farther.

      After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy
      to know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their
      watches, that it was time to be at home.

      “What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!” was a wonder which
      introduced the discussion of _their_ affairs. Darcy was delighted
      with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest
      information of it.

      “I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.

      “Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”

      “That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as
      much.” And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had
      been pretty much the case.

      “On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
      confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago.
      I told him of all that had occurred to make my former
      interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise
      was great. He had never had the slightest suspicion. I told him,
      moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had
      done, that your sister was indifferent to him; and as I could
      easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt
      no doubt of their happiness together.”

      Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing
      his friend.

      “Did you speak from your own observation,” said she, “when you
      told him that my sister loved him, or merely from my information
      last spring?”

      “From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two
      visits which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of her
      affection.”

      “And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate
      conviction to him.”

      “It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had
      prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case,
      but his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to
      confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended
      him. I could not allow myself to conceal that your sister had
      been in town three months last winter, that I had known it, and
      purposely kept it from him. He was angry. But his anger, I am
      persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained in any doubt of your
      sister’s sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me now.”

      Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most
      delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was
      invaluable; but she checked herself. She remembered that he had
      yet to learn to be laughed at, and it was rather too early to
      begin. In anticipating the happiness of Bingley, which of course
      was to be inferior only to his own, he continued the conversation
      till they reached the house. In the hall they parted.




Chapter 59

      “My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a
      question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she
      entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to
      table. She had only to say in reply, that they had wandered
      about, till she was beyond her own knowledge. She coloured as she
      spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion
      of the truth.

      The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary.
      The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged
      were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness
      overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather
      _knew_ that she was happy than _felt_ herself to be so; for,
      besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils
      before her. She anticipated what would be felt in the family when
      her situation became known; she was aware that no one liked him
      but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a _dislike_
      which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.

      At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very
      far from Miss Bennet’s general habits, she was absolutely
      incredulous here.

      “You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!—engaged to Mr. Darcy! No,
      no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.”

      “This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on
      you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not.
      Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He
      still loves me, and we are engaged.”

      Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know
      how much you dislike him.”

      “You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot.
      Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in
      such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the
      last time I shall ever remember it myself.”

      Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
      seriously assured her of its truth.

      “Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,”
      cried Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would—I do congratulate
      you—but are you certain? forgive the question—are you quite
      certain that you can be happy with him?”

      “There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already,
      that we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you
      pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?”

      “Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself
      more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as
      impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh,
      Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. Are you
      quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?”

      “Oh, yes! You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do,
      when I tell you all.”

      “What do you mean?”

      “Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I
      am afraid you will be angry.”

      “My dearest sister, now _be_ serious. I want to talk very
      seriously. Let me know every thing that I am to know, without
      delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?”

      “It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it
      began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his
      beautiful grounds at Pemberley.”

      Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
      desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn
      assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss
      Bennet had nothing further to wish.

      “Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as
      myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his
      love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as
      Bingley’s friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley and
      yourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very
      reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at
      Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another,
      not to you.”

      Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been
      unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own
      feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But
      now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia’s
      marriage. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in
      conversation.

      “Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the
      next morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here
      again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so
      tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he
      would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb us
      with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk
      out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s way.”

      Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal;
      yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him
      such an epithet.

      As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively,
      and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good
      information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Mrs. Bennet,
      have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way
      again to-day?”

      “I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. Bennet, “to
      walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and
      Mr. Darcy has never seen the view.”

      “It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. Bingley; “but I
      am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won’t it, Kitty?” Kitty
      owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great
      curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently
      consented. As she went up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet
      followed her, saying:

      “I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
      disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind
      it: it is all for Jane’s sake, you know; and there is no occasion
      for talking to him, except just now and then. So, do not put
      yourself to inconvenience.”

      During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet’s consent
      should be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved
      to herself the application for her mother’s. She could not
      determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting
      whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome
      her abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently set
      against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain
      that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her
      sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the
      first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her
      disapprobation.

      In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library,
      she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on
      seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father’s opposition,
      but he was going to be made unhappy; and that it should be
      through her means—that _she_, his favourite child, should be
      distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears
      and regrets in disposing of her—was a wretched reflection, and
      she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at
      him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he
      approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
      pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, “Go to your
      father, he wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.

      Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
      “Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your
      senses, to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”

      How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been
      more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have
      spared her from explanations and professions which it was
      exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she
      assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.

      “Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich,
      to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages
      than Jane. But will they make you happy?”

      “Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief
      of my indifference?”

      “None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of
      man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.”

      “I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes, “I
      love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly
      amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain
      me by speaking of him in such terms.”

      “Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the
      kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything,
      which he condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are
      resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of
      it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be
      neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your
      husband; unless you looked up to him as a superior. Your lively
      talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal
      marriage. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My
      child, let me not have the grief of seeing _you_ unable to
      respect your partner in life. You know not what you are about.”

      Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her
      reply; and at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was
      really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change
      which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute
      certainty that his affection was not the work of a day, but had
      stood the test of many months’ suspense, and enumerating with
      energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her father’s
      incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.

      “Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no
      more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not
      have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”

      To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr.
      Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with
      astonishment.

      “This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every
      thing; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow’s
      debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will
      save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle’s
      doing, I must and _would_ have paid him; but these violent young
      lovers carry every thing their own way. I shall offer to pay him
      to-morrow; he will rant and storm about his love for you, and
      there will be an end of the matter.”

      He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his
      reading Mr. Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some
      time, allowed her at last to go—saying, as she quitted the room,
      “If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am
      quite at leisure.”

      Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and,
      after half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was
      able to join the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was
      too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away;
      there was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and the
      comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.

      When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she
      followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect
      was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat
      quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under
      many, many minutes that she could comprehend what she heard;
      though not in general backward to credit what was for the
      advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a lover to
      any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
      her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

      “Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy!
      Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest
      Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what
      jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane’s is nothing to
      it—nothing at all. I am so pleased—so happy. Such a charming
      man!—so handsome! so tall!—Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for
      my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook
      it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing that is
      charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord!
      What will become of me. I shall go distracted.”

      This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be
      doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard
      only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three
      minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.

      “My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else! Ten
      thousand a year, and very likely more! ’Tis as good as a Lord!
      And a special licence. You must and shall be married by a special
      licence. But my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is
      particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow.”

      This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour to the
      gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in
      the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of
      her relations’ consent, there was still something to be wished
      for. But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for
      Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law
      that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power
      to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his
      opinion.

      Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains
      to get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that
      he was rising every hour in his esteem.

      “I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. “Wickham,
      perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband
      quite as well as Jane’s.”




Chapter 60

      Elizabeth’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted
      Mr. Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her.
      “How could you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on
      charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could
      set you off in the first place?”

      “I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the
      words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in
      the middle before I knew that I _had_ begun.”

      “My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners—my
      behaviour to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil,
      and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain
      than not. Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”

      “For the liveliness of your mind, I did.”

      “You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little
      less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference,
      of officious attention. You were disgusted with the women who
      were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for _your_
      approbation alone. I roused, and interested you, because I was so
      unlike _them_. Had you not been really amiable, you would have
      hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you took to disguise
      yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your
      heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
      courted you. There—I have saved you the trouble of accounting for
      it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it
      perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of
      me—but nobody thinks of _that_ when they fall in love.”

      “Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while
      she was ill at Netherfield?”

      “Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a
      virtue of it by all means. My good qualities are under your
      protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible;
      and, in return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing
      and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin
      directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the
      point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first called,
      and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did
      you look as if you did not care about me?”

      “Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no
      encouragement.”

      “But I was embarrassed.”

      “And so was I.”

      “You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”

      “A man who had felt less, might.”

      “How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give,
      and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder
      how long you _would_ have gone on, if you had been left to
      yourself. I wonder when you _would_ have spoken, if I had not
      asked you! My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to
      Lydia had certainly great effect. _Too much_, I am afraid; for
      what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs from a breach
      of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the subject. This
      will never do.”

      “You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly
      fair. Lady Catherine’s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us
      were the means of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for
      my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your
      gratitude. I was not in a humour to wait for any opening of
      yours. My aunt’s intelligence had given me hope, and I was
      determined at once to know every thing.”

      “Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her
      happy, for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come
      down to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and
      be embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious
      consequence?”

      “My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could,
      whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or
      what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were
      still partial to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession
      to him which I have since made.”

      “Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what
      is to befall her?”

      “I am more likely to want  time than courage, Elizabeth. But it
      ought to be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it
      shall be done directly.”

      “And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you
      and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady
      once did. But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer
      neglected.”

      From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr.
      Darcy had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs.
      Gardiner’s long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate
      which she knew would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to
      find that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of
      happiness, and immediately wrote as follows:

      “I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to
      have done, for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of
      particulars; but to say the truth, I was too cross to write. You
      supposed more than really existed. But _now_ suppose as much as
      you choose; give a loose rein to your fancy, indulge your
      imagination in every possible flight which the subject will
      afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot
      greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a
      great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and
      again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to
      wish it! Your idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round
      the Park every day. I am the happiest creature in the world.
      Perhaps other people have said so before, but not one with such
      justice. I am happier even than Jane; she only smiles, I laugh.
      Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that he can spare
      from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. Yours,
      etc.”

      Mr. Darcy’s letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style;
      and still different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr.
      Collins, in reply to his last.

      “Dear Sir,
      “I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will
      soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as
      you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has
      more to give.

      “Yours sincerely, etc.”

      Miss Bingley’s congratulations to her brother, on his approaching
      marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote
      even to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat
      all her former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but
      she was affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could
      not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was
      deserved.

      The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar
      information, was as sincere as her brother’s in sending it. Four
      sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and
      all her earnest desire of being loved by her sister.

      Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any
      congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family
      heard that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The
      reason of this sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine
      had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her
      nephew’s letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match,
      was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over. At such a
      moment, the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to
      Elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings she must
      sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she saw Mr.
      Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
      husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could
      even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on
      carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed
      his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James’s, with
      very decent composure. If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not
      till Sir William was out of sight.

      Mrs. Phillips’s vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax
      on his forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her
      sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with the
      familiarity which Bingley’s good humour encouraged, yet, whenever
      she _did_ speak, she must be vulgar. Nor was her respect for him,
      though it made her more quiet, at all likely to make her more
      elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the
      frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to
      herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse
      without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings
      arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of
      its pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked
      forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from
      society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and
      elegance of their family party at Pemberley.




Chapter 61

      Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs.
      Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what
      delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked
      of Mrs. Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake
      of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in
      the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an
      effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman
      for the rest of her life; though perhaps it was lucky for her
      husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so
      unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and
      invariably silly.

      Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection
      for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do.
      He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least
      expected.

      Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth.
      So near a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not
      desirable even to _his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart.
      The darling wish of his sisters was then gratified; he bought an
      estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire, and Jane and
      Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were
      within thirty miles of each other.

      Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her
      time with her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what
      she had generally known, her improvement was great. She was not
      of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the
      influence of Lydia’s example, she became, by proper attention and
      management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. From
      the further disadvantage of Lydia’s society she was of course
      carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham frequently invited her to
      come and stay with her, with the promise of balls and young men,
      her father would never consent to her going.

      Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was
      necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs.
      Bennet’s being quite unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix
      more with the world, but she could still moralize over every
      morning visit; and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons
      between her sisters’ beauty and her own, it was suspected by her
      father that she submitted to the change without much reluctance.

      As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution
      from the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the
      conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with
      whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown
      to her; and in spite of every thing, was not wholly without hope
      that Darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune. The
      congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on her
      marriage, explained to her that, by his wife at least, if not by
      himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this
      effect:

      “My dear Lizzy,
      “I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my
      dear Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to
      have you so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope
      you will think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at
      court very much, and I do not think we shall have quite money
      enough to live upon without some help. Any place would do, of
      about three or four hundred a year; but however, do not speak to
      Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.

      “Yours, etc.”

      As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she
      endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and
      expectation of the kind. Such relief, however, as it was in her
      power to afford, by the practice of what might be called economy
      in her own private expences, she frequently sent them. It had
      always been evident to her that such an income as theirs, under
      the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants, and
      heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their
      support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
      herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance
      towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even
      when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was
      unsettled in the extreme. They were always moving from place to
      place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more
      than they ought. His affection for her soon sunk into
      indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and in spite of her
      youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to reputation
      which her marriage had given her.

      Though Darcy could never receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for
      Elizabeth’s sake, he assisted him further in his profession.
      Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone
      to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they
      both of them frequently staid so long, that even Bingley’s good
      humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to _talk_ of
      giving them a hint to be gone.

      Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s marriage; but
      as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at
      Pemberley, she dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of
      Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid
      off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth.

      Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the
      sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able
      to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had
      the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first
      she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her
      lively, sportive, manner of talking to her brother. He, who had
      always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her
      affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind
      received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. By
      Elizabeth’s instructions, she began to comprehend that a woman
      may take liberties with her husband which a brother will not
      always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than
      himself.

      Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her
      nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her
      character in her reply to the letter which announced its
      arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of
      Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But
      at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion, he was prevailed on to
      overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a
      little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment
      gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity to
      see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait
      on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods
      had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress,
      but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.

      With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
      Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were
      both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons
      who, by bringing her into Derbyshire, had been the means of
      uniting them.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



J . K . R O W L ! N G 

HARRY 

POTTER 




/ 




THE WORST BIRTHDAY 

Not for the first time, an argument had broken out 
over breakfast at number four, Privet Drive. Mr. 
Vernon Dursley had been woken in the early hours of 
the morning by a loud, hooting noise from his nephew 
Harry’s room. 

“Third time this week!” he roared across the table. “If 
you can’t control that owl, it’ll have to go!” 

Harry tried, yet again, to explain. 

“She’s bored,” he said. “She’s used to flying around 
outside. If I could just let her out at night — ” 

“Do I look stupid?” snarled Uncle Vernon, a bit of 
fried egg dangling from his bushy mustache. “I know 
what 11 happen if that owl’s let out.” 

He exchanged dark looks with his wife, Petunia. 

Harry tried to argue back but his words were drowned 
by a long, loud belch from the Dursleys’ son, Dudley. 

Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



“I want more bacon.” 



“There’s more in the frying pan, sweetums,” said Aunt 
Petunia, turning misty eyes on her massive son. “We 
must build you up while we’ve got the chance. ... I 
don’t like the sound of that school food. ...” 

“Nonsense, Petunia, I never went hungry when / was 
at Smeltings,” said Uncle Vernon heartily. “Dudley 
gets enough, don’t you, son?” 

Dudley, who was so large his bottom drooped over 
either side of the kitchen chair, grinned and turned to 
Harry. 

“Pass the frying pan.” 

“You’ve forgotten the magic word,” said Harry 
irritably. 

The effect of this simple sentence on the rest of the 
family was incredible: Dudley gasped and fell off his 
chair with a crash that shook the whole kitchen; Mrs. 
Dursley gave a small scream and clapped her hands 
to her mouth; Mr. Dursley jumped to his feet, veins 
throbbing in his temples. 

“I meant ‘please’!” said Harry quickly. “I didn’t mean 



“WHAT HAVE I TOLD YOU,” thundered his uncle, 
spraying spit over the table, “ABOUT SAYING THE ‘M’ 
WORD IN OUR HOUSE?” 

“But I — ” 

“HOW DARE YOU THREATEN DUDLEY!” roared 
Uncle Vernon, pounding the table with his fist. 



Page | 3 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I just — ” 



“I WARNED YOU! I WILL NOT TOLERATE MENTION 
OF YOUR ABNORMALITY UNDER THIS ROOF!” 

Harry stared from his purple-faced uncle to his pale 
aunt, who was trying to heave Dudley to his feet. 

“All right,” said Harry, “all right ...” 

Uncle Vernon sat back down, breathing like a winded 
rhinoceros and watching Harry closely out of the 
corners of his small, sharp eyes. 

Ever since Harry had come home for the summer 
holidays, Uncle Vernon had been treating him like a 
bomb that might go off at any moment, because Harry 
Potter wasn’t a normal boy. As a matter of fact, he 
was as not normal as it is possible to be. 

Harry Potter was a wizard — a wizard fresh from his 
first year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and 
Wizardry. And if the Dursleys were unhappy to have 
him back for the holidays, it was nothing to how 
Harry felt. 

He missed Hogwarts so much it was like having a 
constant stomachache. He missed the castle, with its 
secret passageways and ghosts, his classes (though 
perhaps not Snape, the Potions master), the mail 
arriving by owl, eating banquets in the Great Hall, 
sleeping in his four-poster bed in the tower dormitory, 
visiting the gamekeeper, Hagrid, in his cabin next to 
the Forbidden Forest in the grounds, and, especially, 
Quidditch, the most popular sport in the wizarding 
world (six tall goal posts, four flying balls, and 
fourteen players on broomsticks). 



Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




All Harry’s spellbooks, his wand, robes, cauldron, and 
top-of-the-line Nimbus Two Thousand broomstick had 
been locked in a cupboard under the stairs by Uncle 
Vernon the instant Harry had come home. What did 
the Dursleys care if Harry lost his place on the House 
Quidditch team because he hadn’t practiced all 
summer? What was it to the Dursleys if Harry went 
back to school without any of his homework done? 

The Dursleys were what wizards called Muggles (not a 
drop of magical blood in their veins), and as far as 
they were concerned, having a wizard in the family 
was a matter of deepest shame. Uncle Vernon had 
even padlocked Harry’s owl, Hedwig, inside her cage, 
to stop her from carrying messages to anyone in the 
wizarding world. 

Harry looked nothing like the rest of the family. Uncle 
Vernon was large and neckless, with an enormous 
black mustache; Aunt Petunia was horse-faced and 
bony; Dudley was blond, pink, and porky. Harry, on 
the other hand, was small and skinny, with brilliant 
green eyes and jet-black hair that was always untidy. 
He wore round glasses, and on his forehead was a 
thin, lightning-shaped scar. 

It was this scar that made Harry so particularly 
unusual, even for a wizard. This scar was the only 
hint of Harry’s very mysterious past, of the reason he 
had been left on the Dursleys’ doorstep eleven years 
before. 

At the age of one year old, Harry had somehow 
survived a curse from the greatest Dark sorcerer of all 
time, Lord Voldemort, whose name most witches and 
wizards still feared to speak. Harry’s parents had died 
in Voldemort’s attack, but Harry had escaped with his 
lightning scar, and somehow — nobody understood 
why — Voldemort’s powers had been destroyed the 
instant he had failed to kill Harry. 

Page | 5 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




So Harry had been brought up by his dead mother’s 
sister and her husband. He had spent ten years with 
the Dursleys, never understanding why he kept 
making odd things happen without meaning to, 
believing the Dursleys’ story that he had got his scar 
in the car crash that had killed his parents. 

And then, exactly a year ago, Hogwarts had written to 
Harry, and the whole story had come out. Harry had 
taken up his place at wizard school, where he and his 
scar were famous . . . but now the school year was 
over, and he was back with the Dursleys for the 
summer, back to being treated like a dog that had 
rolled in something smelly. 

The Dursleys hadn’t even remembered that today 
happened to be Harry’s twelfth birthday. Of course, 
his hopes hadn’t been high; they’d never given him a 
real present, let alone a cake — but to ignore it 
completely ... 

At that moment, Uncle Vernon cleared his throat 
importantly and said, “Now, as we all know, today is a 
very important day.” 

Harry looked up, hardly daring to believe it. 

“This could well be the day I make the biggest deal of 
my career,” said Uncle Vernon. 

Harry went back to his toast. Of course, he thought 
bitterly, Uncle Vernon was talking about the stupid 
dinner party. He’d been talking of nothing else for two 
weeks. Some rich builder and his wife were coming to 
dinner and Uncle Vernon was hoping to get a huge 
order from him (Uncle Vernon’s company made drills). 



Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I think we should run through the schedule one 
more time,” said Uncle Vernon. “We should all be in 
position at eight o’clock. Petunia, you will be — ?” 

“In the lounge,” said Aunt Petunia promptly, “waiting 
to welcome them graciously to our home.” 

“Good, good. And Dudley?” 

“I’ll be waiting to open the door.” Dudley put on a 
foul, simpering smile. “May I take your coats, Mr. and 
Mrs. Mason?” 

“They’ll love him!” cried Aunt Petunia rapturously. 

“Excellent, Dudley,” said Uncle Vernon. Then he 
rounded on Harry. “And you?” 

“I’ll be in my bedroom, making no noise and 
pretending I’m not there,” said Harry tonelessly. 

“Exactly,” said Uncle Vernon nastily. “I will lead them 
into the lounge, introduce you, Petunia, and pour 
them drinks. At eight-fifteen — ” 

“I’ll announce dinner,” said Aunt Petunia. 

“And, Dudley, you 11 say — ” 

“May I take you through to the dining room, Mrs. 
Mason?” said Dudley, offering his fat arm to an 
invisible woman. 

“My perfect little gentleman!” sniffed Aunt Petunia. 

“And you?” said Uncle Vernon viciously to Harry. 

“I’ll be in my room, making no noise and pretending 
I’m not there,” said Harry dully. 

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Precisely. Now, we should aim to get in a few good 
compliments at dinner. Petunia, any ideas?” 



“Vernon tells me you’re a wonderful golfer, Mr. 

Mason. ... Do tell me where you bought your dress, 
Mrs. Mason. ...” 

“Perfect ... Dudley?” 

“How about — ‘We had to write an essay about our 
hero at school, Mr. Mason, and I wrote about you.’ ” 

This was too much for both Aunt Petunia and Harry. 
Aunt Petunia burst into tears and hugged her son, 
while Harry ducked under the table so they wouldn’t 
see him laughing. 

“And you, boy?” 

Harry fought to keep his face straight as he emerged. 

“I’ll be in my room, making no noise and pretending 
I’m not there,” he said. 

“Too right, you will,” said Uncle Vernon forcefully. 

“The Masons don’t know anything about you and it’s 
going to stay that way. When dinner’s over, you take 
Mrs. Mason back to the lounge for coffee, Petunia, 
and I’ll bring the subject around to drills. With any 
luck, I’ll have the deal signed and sealed before the 
news at ten. We’ll be shopping for a vacation home in 
Majorca this time tomorrow.” 

Harry couldn’t feel too excited about this. He didn’t 
think the Dursleys would like him any better in 
Majorca than they did on Privet Drive. 

“Right — I’m off into town to pick up the dinner 
jackets for Dudley and me. And you,” he snarled at 

Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry. “You stay out of your aunt’s way while she’s 
cleaning.” 

Harry left through the back door. It was a brilliant, 
sunny day. He crossed the lawn, slumped down on 
the garden bench, and sang under his breath: 

“Happy birthday to me ... happy birthday to me ...” 

No cards, no presents, and he would be spending the 
evening pretending not to exist. He gazed miserably 
into the hedge. He had never felt so lonely. More than 
anything else at Hogwarts, more even than playing 
Quidditch, Harry missed his best friends, Ron 
Weasley and Hermione Granger. They, however, didn’t 
seem to be missing him at all. Neither of them had 
written to him all summer, even though Ron had said 
he was going to ask Harry to come and stay. 

Countless times, Harry had been on the point of 
unlocking Hedwig’s cage by magic and sending her to 
Ron and Hermione with a letter, but it wasn’t worth 
the risk. Underage wizards weren’t allowed to use 
magic outside of school. Harry hadn’t told the 
Dursleys this; he knew it was only their terror that he 
might turn them all into dung beetles that stopped 
them from locking him in the cupboard under the 
stairs with his wand and broomstick. For the first 
couple of weeks back, Harry had enjoyed muttering 
nonsense words under his breath and watching 
Dudley tearing out of the room as fast as his fat legs 
would carry him. But the long silence from Ron and 
Hermione had made Harry feel so cut off from the 
magical world that even taunting Dudley had lost its 
appeal — and now Ron and Hermione had forgotten 
his birthday. 

What wouldn’t he give now for a message from 
Hogwarts? From any witch or wizard? He’d almost be 

Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




glad of a sight of his archenemy, Draco Malfoy, just to 
be sure it hadn’t all been a dream. ... 

Not that his whole year at Hogwarts had been fun. At 
the very end of last term, Harry had come face-to-face 
with none other than Lord Voldemort himself. 
Voldemort might be a ruin of his former self, but he 
was still terrifying, still cunning, still determined to 
regain power. Harry had slipped through Voldemort’s 
clutches for a second time, but it had been a narrow 
escape, and even now, weeks later, Harry kept waking 
in the night, drenched in cold sweat, wondering where 
Voldemort was now, remembering his livid face, his 
wide, mad eyes — 

Harry suddenly sat bolt upright on the garden bench. 
He had been staring absent-mindedly into the hedge 
— and the hedge was staring back. Two enormous 
green eyes had appeared among the leaves. 

Harry jumped to his feet just as a jeering voice floated 
across the lawn. 

“I know what day it is,” sang Dudley, waddling toward 
him. 

The huge eyes blinked and vanished. 

“What?” said Harry, not taking his eyes off the spot 
where they had been. 

“I know what day it is,” Dudley repeated, coming right 
up to him. 

“Well done,” said Harry. “So you’ve finally learned the 
days of the week.” 



Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Today’s your birthday,” sneered Dudley. “How come 
you haven’t got any cards? Haven’t you even got 
friends at that freak place?” 

“Better not let your mum hear you talking about my 
school,” said Harry coolly. 

Dudley hitched up his trousers, which were slipping 
down his fat bottom. 

“Why’re you staring at the hedge?” he said 
suspiciously. 

“I’m trying to decide what would be the best spell to 
set it on fire,” said Harry. 

Dudley stumbled backward at once, a look of panic 
on his fat face. 

“You c-can’t — Dad told you you’re not to do m-magic 
— he said hell chuck you out of the house — and you 
haven’t got anywhere else to go — you haven’t got any 
friends to take you — ” 

“ Jiggery pokeryV ’ said Harry in a fierce voice. “Hocus 
pocus — squiggly wiggly — ” 

“MUUUUUUM!” howled Dudley, tripping over his feet 
as he dashed back toward the house. “MUUUUM! 

He’s doing you know what!” 

Harry paid dearly for his moment of fun. As neither 
Dudley nor the hedge was in any way hurt, Aunt 
Petunia knew he hadn’t really done magic, but he still 
had to duck as she aimed a heavy blow at his head 
with the soapy frying pan. Then she gave him work to 
do, with the promise he wouldn’t eat again until he’d 
finished. 



Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




While Dudley lolled around watching and eating ice 
cream, Harry cleaned the windows, washed the car, 
mowed the lawn, trimmed the flowerbeds, pruned and 
watered the roses, and repainted the garden bench. 
The sun blazed overhead, burning the back of his 
neck. Harry knew he shouldn’t have risen to Dudley’s 
bait, but Dudley had said the very thing Harry had 
been thinking himself ... maybe he didn’t have any 
friends at Hogwarts. ... 

Wish they could see famous Harry Potter now, he 
thought savagely as he spread manure on the flower 
beds, his back aching, sweat running down his face. 

It was half past seven in the evening when at last, 
exhausted, he heard Aunt Petunia calling him. 

“Get in here! And walk on the newspaper!” 

Harry moved gladly into the shade of the gleaming 
kitchen. On top of the fridge stood tonight’s pudding: 
a huge mound of whipped cream and sugared violets. 
A loin of roast pork was sizzling in the oven. 

“Eat quickly! The Masons will be here soon!” snapped 
Aunt Petunia, pointing to two slices of bread and a 
lump of cheese on the kitchen table. She was already 
wearing a salmon-pink cocktail dress. 

Harry washed his hands and bolted down his pitiful 
supper. The moment he had finished, Aunt Petunia 
whisked away his plate. “Upstairs! Hurry!” 

As he passed the door to the living room, Harry 
caught a glimpse of Uncle Vernon and Dudley in bow 
ties and dinner jackets. He had only just reached the 
upstairs landing when the doorbell rang and Uncle 
Vernon’s furious face appeared at the foot of the 
stairs. 

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Remember, boy — one sound — ” 

Harry crossed to his bedroom on tiptoe, slipped 
inside, closed the door, and turned to collapse on his 
bed. 

The trouble was, there was already someone sitting 
on it. 



Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






DOBBY’S WARNING 

Harry managed not to shout out, but it was a close 
thing. The little creature on the bed had large, bat- 
like ears and bulging green eyes the size of tennis 
balls. Harry knew instantly that this was what had 
been watching him out of the garden hedge that 
morning. 

As they stared at each other, Harry heard Dudley’s 
voice from the hall. 

“May I take your coats, Mr. and Mrs. Mason?” 

The creature slipped off the bed and bowed so low 
that the end of its long, thin nose touched the carpet. 
Harry noticed that it was wearing what looked like an 
old pillowcase, with rips for arm- and leg-holes. 

“Er — hello,” said Harry nervously. 

“Harry Potter!” said the creature in a high-pitched 
voice Harry was sure would carry down the stairs. “So 



Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



long has Dobby wanted to meet you, sir ... Such an 
honor it is. ...” 

“Th-thank you,” said Harry, edging along the wall and 
sinking into his desk chair, next to Hedwig, who was 
asleep in her large cage. He wanted to ask, “What are 
you?” but thought it would sound too rude, so instead 
he said, “Who are you?” 

“Dobby, sir. Just Dobby. Dobby the house-elf,” said 
the creature. 

“Oh — really?” said Harry. “Er — I don’t want to be 
rude or anything, but — this isn’t a great time for me 
to have a house-elf in my bedroom.” 

Aunt Petunia’s high, false laugh sounded from the 
living room. The elf hung his head. 

“Not that I’m not pleased to meet you,” said Harry 
quickly, “but, er, is there any particular reason you’re 
here?” 

“Oh, yes, sir,” said Dobby earnestly. “Dobby has come 
to tell you, sir ... it is difficult, sir ... Dobby wonders 
where to begin. ...” 

“Sit down,” said Harry politely, pointing at the bed. 

To his horror, the elf burst into tears — very noisy 
tears. 

“S-sit down).” he wailed. “Never ... never ever ...” 

Harry thought he heard the voices downstairs falter. 

“I’m sorry,” he whispered, “I didn’t mean to offend you 
or anything — ” 



Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Offend Dobby!” choked the elf. “Dobby has never 
been asked to sit down by a wizard — like an equal — 



Harry, trying to say “Shh!” and look comforting at the 
same time, ushered Dobby back onto the bed where 
he sat hiccoughing, looking like a large and very ugly 
doll. At last he managed to control himself, and sat 
with his great eyes fixed on Harry in an expression of 
watery adoration. 

“You can’t have met many decent wizards,” said 
Harry, trying to cheer him up. 

Dobby shook his head. Then, without warning, he 
leapt up and started banging his head furiously on 
the window, shouting, “Bad Dobby! Bad Dobby!” 

“Don’t — what are you doing?” Harry hissed, 
springing up and pulling Dobby back onto the bed — 
Hedwig had woken up with a particularly loud 
screech and was beating her wings wildly against the 
bars of her cage. 

“Dobby had to punish himself, sir,” said the elf, who 
had gone slightly cross-eyed. “Dobby almost spoke ill 
of his family, sir. ...” 

“Your family?” 

“The wizard family Dobby serves, sir. ... Dobby is a 
house-elf — bound to serve one house and one family 
forever. ...” 

“Do they know you’re here?” asked Harry curiously. 
Dobby shuddered. 



Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, no, sir, no ... Dobby will have to punish himself 
most grievously for coming to see you, sir. Dobby will 
have to shut his ears in the oven door for this. If they 
ever knew, sir — ” 

“But won’t they notice if you shut your ears in the 
oven door?” 

“Dobby doubts it, sir. Dobby is always having to 
punish himself for something, sir. They lets Dobby get 
on with it, sir. Sometimes they reminds me to do 
extra punishments. ...” 

“But why don’t you leave? Escape?” 

“A house-elf must be set free, sir. And the family will 
never set Dobby free . . . Dobby will serve the family 
until he dies, sir. ...” 

Harry stared. 

“And I thought I had it bad staying here for another 
four weeks,” he said. “This makes the Dursleys sound 
almost human. Can’t anyone help you? Can’t I?” 

Almost at once, Harry wished he hadn’t spoken. 

Dobby dissolved again into wails of gratitude. 

“Please,” Harry whispered frantically, “please be quiet. 
If the Dursleys hear anything, if they know you’re 
here — ” 

“Harry Potter asks if he can help Dobby . . . Dobby has 
heard of your greatness, sir, but of your goodness, 
Dobby never knew. ...” 

Harry, who was feeling distinctly hot in the face, said, 
“Whatever you’ve heard about my greatness is a load 



Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




of rubbish. I’m not even top of my year at Hogwarts; 
that’s Hermione, she — ” 

But he stopped quickly, because thinking about 
Hermione was painful. 

“Harry Potter is humble and modest,” said Dobby 
reverently, his orb-like eyes aglow. “Harry Potter 
speaks not of his triumph over He-Who-Must-Not-Be- 
Named — ” 

“Voldemort?” said Harry. 

Dobby clapped his hands over his bat ears and 
moaned, “Ah, speak not the name, sir! Speak not the 
name!” 

“Sorry,” said Harry quickly. “I know lots of people 
don’t like it. My friend Ron — ” 

He stopped again. Thinking about Ron was painful, 
too. 

Dobby leaned toward Harry, his eyes wide as 
headlights. 

“Dobby heard tell,” he said hoarsely, “that Harry 
Potter met the Dark Lord for a second time, just 
weeks ago ... that Harry Potter escaped yet again.” 

Harry nodded and Dobby’s eyes suddenly shone with 
tears. 

“Ah, sir,” he gasped, dabbing his face with a corner of 
the grubby pillowcase he was wearing. “Harry Potter 
is valiant and bold! He has braved so many dangers 
already! But Dobby has come to protect Harry Potter, 
to warn him, even if he does have to shut his ears in 



Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




the oven door later. . . . Harry Potter must not go back 
to Hogwarts.” 

There was a silence broken only by the chink of 
knives and forks from downstairs and the distant 
rumble of Uncle Vernon’s voice. 

“W-what?” Harry stammered. “But I’ve got to go back 
— term starts on September first. It’s all that’s 
keeping me going. You don’t know what it’s like here. 

I don’t belong here. I belong in your world — at 
Hogwarts.” 

“No, no, no,” squeaked Dobby, shaking his head so 
hard his ears flapped. “Harry Potter must stay where 
he is safe. He is too great, too good, to lose. If Harry 
Potter goes back to Hogwarts, he will be in mortal 
danger.” 

“Why?” said Harry in surprise. 

“There is a plot, Harry Potter. A plot to make most 
terrible things happen at Hogwarts School of 
Witchcraft and Wizardry this year,” whispered Dobby, 
suddenly trembling all over. “Dobby has known it for 
months, sir. Harry Potter must not put himself in 
peril. He is too important, sir!” 

“What terrible things?” said Harry at once. “Who’s 
plotting them?” 

Dobby made a funny choking noise and then banged 
his head frantically against the wall. 

“All right!” cried Harry, grabbing the elf’s arm to stop 
him. “You can’t tell me. I understand. But why are 
you warning me?” A sudden, unpleasant thought 
struck him. “Hang on — this hasn’t got anything to 
do with Vol — sorry — with You-Know-Who, has it? 
Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




You could just shake or nod,” he added hastily as 
Dobby’s head tilted worryingly close to the wall again. 

Slowly, Dobby shook his head. 

“Not — not He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, sir — ” 

But Dobby’s eyes were wide and he seemed to be 
trying to give Harry a hint. Harry, however, was 
completely lost. 

“He hasn’t got a brother, has he?” 

Dobby shook his head, his eyes wider than ever. 

“Well then, I can’t think who else would have a 
chance of making horrible things happen at 
Hogwarts,” said Harry. “I mean, there’s Dumbledore, 
for one thing — you know who Dumbledore is, don’t 
you?” 

Dobby bowed his head. 

“Albus Dumbledore is the greatest headmaster 
Hogwarts has ever had. Dobby knows it, sir. Dobby 
has heard Dumbledore’s powers rival those of He- 
Who-Must-Not-Be-Named at the height of his 
strength. But, sir” — Dobby’s voice dropped to an 
urgent whisper — “there are powers Dumbledore 
doesn’t ... powers no decent wizard ...” 

And before Harry could stop him, Dobby bounded off 
the bed, seized Harry’s desk lamp, and started 
beating himself around the head with earsplitting 
yelps. 

A sudden silence fell downstairs. Two seconds later 
Harry, heart thudding madly, heard Uncle Vernon 



Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




coming into the hall, calling, “Dudley must have left 
his television on again, the little tyke!” 

“Quick! In the closet!” hissed Harry, stuffing Dobby 
in, shutting the door, and flinging himself onto the 
bed just as the door handle turned. 

“What — the — devil — are — you — doing?” said 
Uncle Vernon through gritted teeth, his face horribly 
close to Harry’s. “You’ve just ruined the punch line of 
my Japanese golfer joke. ... One more sound and 
you’ll wish you’d never been born, boy!” 

He stomped flat-footed from the room. 

Shaking, Harry let Dobby out of the closet. 

“See what it’s like here?” he said. “See why I’ve got to 
go back to Hogwarts? It’s the only place I’ve got — 
well, I think I’ve got friends.” 

“Friends who don’t even write to Harry Potter?” said 
Dobby slyly. 

“I expect they’ve just been — wait a minute,” said 
Harry, frowning. “How do you know my friends 
haven’t been writing to me?” 

Dobby shuffled his feet. 

“Harry Potter mustn’t be angry with Dobby. Dobby 
did it for the best — ” 

“Have you been stopping my letters?” 

“Dobby has them here, sir,” said the elf. Stepping 
nimbly out of Harry’s reach, he pulled a thick wad of 
envelopes from the inside of the pillowcase he was 
wearing. Harry could make out Hermione’s neat 

Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




writing, Ron’s untidy scrawl, and even a scribble that 
looked as though it was from the Hogwarts 
gamekeeper, Hagrid. 

Dobby blinked anxiously up at Harry. 

“Harry Potter mustn’t be angry. ... Dobby hoped ... if 
Harry Potter thought his friends had forgotten him . . . 
Harry Potter might not want to go back to school, sir. 



Harry wasn’t listening. He made a grab for the letters, 
but Dobby jumped out of reach. 

“Harry Potter will have them, sir, if he gives Dobby his 
word that he will not return to Hogwarts. Ah, sir, this 
is a danger you must not face! Say you won’t go back, 
sir!” 

“No,” said Harry angrily. “Give me my friends’ letters!” 

“Then Harry Potter leaves Dobby no choice,” said the 
elf sadly. 

Before Harry could move, Dobby had darted to the 
bedroom door, pulled it open, and sprinted down the 
stairs. 

Mouth dry, stomach lurching, Harry sprang after him, 
trying not to make a sound. He jumped the last six 
steps, landing catlike on the hall carpet, looking 
around for Dobby. From the dining room he heard 
Uncle Vernon saying, "... tell Petunia that very funny 
story about those American plumbers, Mr. Mason. 
She’s been dying to hear ...” 

Harry ran up the hall into the kitchen and felt his 
stomach disappear. 



Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Aunt Petunia’s masterpiece of a pudding, the 
mountain of cream and sugared violets, was floating 
up near the ceiling. On top of a cupboard in the 
corner crouched Dobby. 

“No,” croaked Harry. “Please ... they’ll kill me. ...” 
“Harry Potter must say he’s not going back to school 



“Dobby ... please ...” 

“Say it, sir — ” 

“I can’t — ” 

Dobby gave him a tragic look. 

“Then Dobby must do it, sir, for Harry Potter’s own 
good.” 

The pudding fell to the floor with a heart-stopping 
crash. Cream splattered the windows and walls as the 
dish shattered. With a crack like a whip, Dobby 
vanished. 

There were screams from the dining room and Uncle 
Vernon burst into the kitchen to find Harry, rigid with 
shock, covered from head to foot in Aunt Petunia’s 
pudding. 

At first, it looked as though Uncle Vernon would 
manage to gloss the whole thing over. (“Just our 
nephew — very disturbed — meeting strangers upsets 
him, so we kept him upstairs. ...”) He shooed the 
shocked Masons back into the dining room, promised 
Harry he would flay him to within an inch of his life 
when the Masons had left, and handed him a mop. 
Aunt Petunia dug some ice cream out of the freezer 
Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




and Harry, still shaking, started scrubbing the 
kitchen clean. 

Uncle Vernon might still have been able to make his 
deal — if it hadn’t been for the owl. 

Aunt Petunia was just passing around a box of after- 
dinner mints when a huge barn owl swooped through 
the dining room window, dropped a letter on Mrs. 
Mason’s head, and swooped out again. Mrs. Mason 
screamed like a banshee and ran from the house 
shouting about lunatics. Mr. Mason stayed just long 
enough to tell the Dursleys that his wife was mortally 
afraid of birds of all shapes and sizes, and to ask 
whether this was their idea of a joke. 

Harry stood in the kitchen, clutching the mop for 
support, as Uncle Vernon advanced on him, a 
demonic glint in his tiny eyes. 

“Read it!” he hissed evilly, brandishing the letter the 
owl had delivered. “Go on — read it!” 

Harry took it. It did not contain birthday greetings. 

Dear Mr. Potter, 

We have received intelligence that a Hover Charm was 
used at your place of residence this evening at twelve 
minutes past nine. 

As you know, underage wizards are not permitted to 
perform spells outside school, and further spellwork on 
your part may lead to expulsion from said school 
(Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage 
Sorcery, 1875, Paragraph C). 

We would also ask you to remember that any magical 
activity that risks notice by members of the non- 

P a g e | 24 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




magical community (Muggles) is a serious offense 
under section 13 of the International Confederation of 
Warlocks’ Statute of Secrecy. 

Enjoy your holidays! 

Yours sincerely, 

Mafalda Hopkirk 

IMPROPER USE OF MAGIC OFFICE 
Ministry of Magic 

Harry looked up from the letter and gulped. 

“You didn’t tell us you weren’t allowed to use magic 
outside school,” said Uncle Vernon, a mad gleam 
dancing in his eyes. “Forgot to mention it. ... Slipped 
your mind, I daresay. ...” 

He was bearing down on Harry like a great bulldog, 
all his teeth bared. “Well, I’ve got news for you, boy. ... 
I’m locking you up. ... You’re never going back to that 
school . . . never . . . and if you try and magic yourself 
out — they 11 expel you!” 

And laughing like a maniac, he dragged Harry back 
upstairs. 

Uncle Vernon was as bad as his word. The following 
morning, he paid a man to fit bars on Harry’s window. 
He himself fitted a cat-flap in the bedroom door, so 
that small amounts of food could be pushed inside 
three times a day. They let Harry out to use the 
bathroom morning and evening. Otherwise, he was 
locked in his room around the clock. 



Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Three days later, the Dursleys were showing no sign 
of relenting, and Harry couldn’t see any way out of his 
situation. He lay on his bed watching the sun sinking 
behind the bars on the window and wondered 
miserably what was going to happen to him. 

What was the good of magicking himself out of his 
room if Hogwarts would expel him for doing it? Yet life 
at Privet Drive had reached an all-time low. Now that 
the Dursleys knew they weren’t going to wake up as 
fruit bats, he had lost his only weapon. Dobby might 
have saved Harry from horrible happenings at 
Hogwarts, but the way things were going, he’d 
probably starve to death anyway. 

The cat-flap rattled and Aunt Petunia’s hand 
appeared, pushing a bowl of canned soup into the 
room. Harry, whose insides were aching with hunger, 
jumped off his bed and seized it. The soup was stone- 
cold, but he drank half of it in one gulp. Then he 
crossed the room to Hedwig’s cage and tipped the 
soggy vegetables at the bottom of the bowl into her 
empty food tray. She ruffled her feathers and gave 
him a look of deep disgust. 

“It’s no good turning your beak up at it — that’s all 
we’ve got,” said Harry grimly. 

He put the empty bowl back on the floor next to the 
cat-flap and lay back down on the bed, somehow even 
hungrier than he had been before the soup. 

Supposing he was still alive in another four weeks, 
what would happen if he didn’t turn up at Hogwarts? 
Would someone be sent to see why he hadn’t come 
back? Would they be able to make the Dursleys let 
him go? 



Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




The room was growing dark. Exhausted, stomach 
rumbling, mind spinning over the same unanswerable 
questions, Harry fell into an uneasy sleep. 

He dreamed that he was on show in a zoo, with a card 
reading UNDERAGE WIZARD attached to his cage. 
People goggled through the bars at him as he lay, 
starving and weak, on a bed of straw. He saw Dobby’s 
face in the crowd and shouted out, asking for help, 
but Dobby called, “Harry Potter is safe there, sir!” and 
vanished. Then the Dursleys appeared and Dudley 
rattled the bars of the cage, laughing at him. 

“Stop it,” Harry muttered as the rattling pounded in 
his sore head. “Leave me alone ... cut it out ... I’m 
trying to sleep. ...” 

He opened his eyes. Moonlight was shining through 
the bars on the window. And someone was goggling 
through the bars at him: a freckle-faced, red-haired, 
long-nosed someone. 

Ron Weasley was outside Harry’s window. 



Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




3 




THE BURROW 

“Ron\” breathed Harry, creeping to the window and 
pushing it up so they could talk through the bars. 
“Ron, how did you — What the — ?” 

Harry’s mouth fell open as the full impact of what he 
was seeing hit him. Ron was leaning out of the back 
window of an old turquoise car, which was parked in 
midair. Grinning at Harry from the front seats were 
Fred and George, Ron’s elder twin brothers. 

“All right, Harry?” asked George. 

“What’s been going on?” said Ron. “Why haven’t you 
been answering my letters? I’ve asked you to stay 
about twelve times, and then Dad came home and 
said you’d got an official warning for using magic in 
front of Muggles — ” 

“It wasn’t me — and how did he know?” 

“He works for the Ministry,” said Ron. “You know 
we’re not supposed to do spells outside school — ” 

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



“You should talk,” said Harry, staring at the floating 
car. 

“Oh, this doesn’t count,” said Ron. “We’re only 
borrowing this. It’s Dad’s, we didn’t enchant it. But 
doing magic in front of those Muggles you live with — ” 

“I told you, I didn’t — but it’ll take too long to explain 
now — look, can you tell them at Hogwarts that the 
Dursleys have locked me up and won’t let me come 
back, and obviously I can’t magic myself out, because 
the Ministry’ll think that’s the second spell I’ve done 
in three days, so — ” 

“Stop gibbering,” said Ron. “We’ve come to take you 
home with us.” 

“But you can’t magic me out either — ” 

“We don’t need to,” said Ron, jerking his head toward 
the front seat and grinning. “You forget who I’ve got 
with me.” 

“Tie that around the bars,” said Fred, throwing the 
end of a rope to Harry. 

“If the Dursleys wake up, I’m dead,” said Harry as he 
tied the rope tightly around a bar and Fred revved up 
the car. 

“Don’t worry,” said Fred, “and stand back.” 

Harry moved back into the shadows next to Hedwig, 
who seemed to have realized how important this was 
and kept still and silent. The car revved louder and 
louder and suddenly, with a crunching noise, the 
bars were pulled clean out of the window as Fred 
drove straight up in the air. Harry ran back to the 
window to see the bars dangling a few feet above the 
Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




ground. Panting, Ron hoisted them up into the car. 
Harry listened anxiously, but there was no sound 
from the Dursleys’ bedroom. 

When the bars were safely in the back seat with Ron, 
Fred reversed as close as possible to Harry’s window. 

“Get in,” Ron said. 

“But all my Hogwarts stuff — my wand — my 
broomstick — ” 

“Where is it?” 

“Locked in the cupboard under the stairs, and I can’t 
get out of this room — ” 

“No problem,” said George from the front passenger 
seat. “Out of the way, Harry.” 

Fred and George climbed catlike through the window 
into Harry’s room. You had to hand it to them, 
thought Harry, as George took an ordinary hairpin 
from his pocket and started to pick the lock. 

“A lot of wizards think it’s a waste of time, knowing 
this sort of Muggle trick,” said Fred, “but we feel 
they’re skills worth learning, even if they are a bit 
slow.” 

There was a small click and the door swung open. 

“So — we’ll get your trunk — you grab anything you 
need from your room and hand it out to Ron,” 
whispered George. 

“Watch out for the bottom stair — it creaks,” Harry 
whispered back as the twins disappeared onto the 
dark landing. 

Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry dashed around his room, collecting his things 
and passing them out of the window to Ron. Then he 
went to help Fred and George heave his trunk up the 
stairs. Harry heard Uncle Vernon cough. 

At last, panting, they reached the landing, then 
carried the trunk through Harry’s room to the open 
window. Fred climbed back into the car to pull with 
Ron, and Harry and George pushed from the bedroom 
side. Inch by inch, the trunk slid through the window. 

Uncle Vernon coughed again. 

“A bit more,” panted Fred, who was pulling from 
inside the car. “One good push — ” 

Harry and George threw their shoulders against the 
trunk and it slid out of the window into the back seat 
of the car. 

“Okay, let’s go,” George whispered. 

But as Harry climbed onto the windowsill there came 
a sudden loud screech from behind him, followed 
immediately by the thunder of Uncle Vernon’s voice. 

“THAT RUDDY OWL!” 

“I’ve forgotten Hedwig!” 

Harry tore back across the room as the landing light 
clicked on — he snatched up Hedwig’s cage, dashed 
to the window, and passed it out to Ron. He was 
scrambling back onto the chest of drawers when 
Uncle Vernon hammered on the unlocked door — and 
it crashed open. 



Page | 31 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




For a split second, Uncle Vernon stood framed in the 
doorway; then he let out a bellow like an angry bull 
and dived at Harry, grabbing him by the ankle. 

Ron, Fred, and George seized Harry’s arms and pulled 
as hard as they could. 

“Petunia!” roared Uncle Vernon. “He’s getting away! 
HE’S GETTING AWAY!” 

But the Weasleys gave a gigantic tug and Harry’s leg 
slid out of Uncle Vernon’s grasp — Harry was in the 
car — he’d slammed the door shut — 

“Put your foot down, Fred!” yelled Ron, and the car 
shot suddenly toward the moon. 

Harry couldn’t believe it — he was free. He rolled 
down the window, the night air whipping his hair, 
and looked back at the shrinking rooftops of Privet 
Drive. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley were 
all hanging, dumbstruck, out of Harry’s window. 

“See you next summer!” Harry yelled. 

The Weasleys roared with laughter and Harry settled 
back in his seat, grinning from ear to ear. 

“Let Hedwig out,” he told Ron. “She can fly behind us. 
She hasn’t had a chance to stretch her wings for 
ages.” 

George handed the hairpin to Ron and, a moment 
later, Hedwig soared joyfully out of the window to 
glide alongside them like a ghost. 

“So — what’s the story, Harry?” said Ron impatiently. 
“What’s been happening?” 



Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry told them all about Dobby, the warning he’d 
given Harry and the fiasco of the violet pudding. 
There was a long, shocked silence when he had 
finished. 

“Very fishy,” said Fred finally. 

“Definitely dodgy,” agreed George. “So he wouldn’t 
even tell you who’s supposed to be plotting all this 
stuff?” 

“I don’t think he could,” said Harry. “I told you, every 
time he got close to letting something slip, he started 
banging his head against the wall.” 

He saw Fred and George look at each other. 

“What, you think he was lying to me?” said Harry. 

“Well,” said Fred, “put it this way — house-elves have 
got powerful magic of their own, but they can’t 
usually use it without their master’s permission. I 
reckon old Dobby was sent to stop you coming back 
to Hogwarts. Someone’s idea of a joke. Can you think 
of anyone at school with a grudge against you?” 

“Yes,” said Harry and Ron together, instantly. 

“Draco Malfoy,” Harry explained. “He hates me.” 

“Draco Malfoy?” said George, turning around. “Not 
Lucius Malfoy’s son?” 

“Must be, it’s not a very common name, is it?” said 
Harry. “Why?” 

“I’ve heard Dad talking about him,” said George. “He 
was a big supporter of You-Know-Who.” 



Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“And when You-Know-Who disappeared,” said Fred, 
craning around to look at Harry, “Lucius Malfoy came 
back saying he’d never meant any of it. Load of dung 
— Dad reckons he was right in You-Know- Who’s 
inner circle.” 

Harry had heard these rumors about Malfoy’s family 
before, and they didn’t surprise him at all. Malfoy 
made Dudley Dursley look like a kind, thoughtful, 
and sensitive boy. 

“I don’t know whether the Malfoys own a house-elf. 

...” said Harry. 

“Well, whoever owns him will be an old wizarding 
family, and they’ll be rich,” said Fred. 

“Yeah, Mum’s always wishing we had a house-elf to 
do the ironing,” said George. “But all we’ve got is a 
lousy old ghoul in the attic and gnomes all over the 
garden. House-elves come with big old manors and 
castles and places like that; you wouldn’t catch one in 
our house. ...” 

Harry was silent. Judging by the fact that Draco 
Malfoy usually had the best of everything, his family 
was rolling in wizard gold; he could just see Malfoy 
strutting around a large manor house. Sending the 
family servant to stop Harry from going back to 
Hogwarts also sounded exactly like the sort of thing 
Malfoy would do. Had Harry been stupid to take 
Dobby seriously? 

“I’m glad we came to get you, anyway,” said Ron. “I 
was getting really worried when you didn’t answer 
any of my letters. I thought it was Errol’s fault at first 



“Who’s Errol?” 

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Our owl. He’s ancient. It wouldn’t be the first time 
he’d collapsed on a delivery. So then I tried to borrow 
Hermes — ” 

“Who?” 

“The owl Mum and Dad bought Percy when he was 
made prefect,” said Fred from the front. 

“But Percy wouldn’t lend him to me,” said Ron. “Said 
he needed him.” 

“Percy’s been acting very oddly this summer,” said 
George, frowning. “And he has been sending a lot of 
letters and spending a load of time shut up in his 
room. ... I mean, there’s only so many times you can 
polish a prefect badge. ... You’re driving too far west, 
Fred,” he added, pointing at a compass on the 
dashboard. Fred twiddled the steering wheel. 

“So, does your dad know you’ve got the car?” said 
Harry, guessing the answer. 

“Er, no,” said Ron, “he had to work tonight. Hopefully 
we’ll be able to get it back in the garage without Mum 
noticing we flew it.” 

“What does your dad do at the Ministry of Magic, 
anyway?” 

“He works in the most boring department,” said Ron. 
“The Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office.” 

“The what?” 

“It’s all to do with bewitching things that are Muggle- 
made, you know, in case they end up back in a 
Muggle shop or house. Like, last year, some old witch 
died and her tea set was sold to an antiques shop. 

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




This Muggle woman bought it, took it home, and tried 
to serve her friends tea in it. It was a nightmare — 
Dad was working overtime for weeks.” 

“What happened?” 

“The teapot went berserk and squirted boiling tea all 
over the place and one man ended up in the hospital 
with the sugar tongs clamped to his nose. Dad was 
going frantic — it’s only him and an old warlock 
called Perkins in the office — and they had to do 
Memory Charms and all sorts of stuff to cover it up — 



“But your dad — this car — ” 

Fred laughed. “Yeah, Dad’s crazy about everything to 
do with Muggles; our shed’s full of Muggle stuff. He 
takes it apart, puts spells on it, and puts it back 
together again. If he raided our house he’d have to put 
himself under arrest. It drives Mum mad.” 

“That’s the main road,” said George, peering down 
through the windshield. “We’ll be there in ten 
minutes. ... Just as well, it’s getting light. ...” 

A faint pinkish glow was visible along the horizon to 
the east. 

Fred brought the car lower, and Harry saw a dark 
patchwork of fields and clumps of trees. 

“We’re a little way outside the village,” said George. 
“Ottery St. Catchpole.” 

Lower and lower went the flying car. The edge of a 
brilliant red sun was now gleaming through the trees. 



Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Touchdown!” said Fred as, with a slight bump, they 
hit the ground. They had landed next to a 
tumbledown garage in a small yard, and Harry looked 
out for the first time at Ron’s house. 

It looked as though it had once been a large stone 
pigpen, but extra rooms had been added here and 
there until it was several stories high and so crooked 
it looked as though it were held up by magic (which, 
Harry reminded himself, it probably was). Four or five 
chimneys were perched on top of the red roof. A 
lopsided sign stuck in the ground near the entrance 
read, THE BURROW. Around the front door lay a 
jumble of rubber boots and a very rusty cauldron. 
Several fat brown chickens were pecking their way 
around the yard. 

“It’s not much,” said Ron. 

“It’s wonderful,” said Harry happily, thinking of Privet 
Drive. 

They got out of the car. 

“Now, we’ll go upstairs really quietly,” said Fred, “and 
wait for Mum to call us for breakfast. Then, Ron, you 
come bounding downstairs going, ‘Mum, look who 
turned up in the night!’ and she’ll be all pleased to 
see Harry and no one need ever know we flew the 
car.” 

“Right,” said Ron. “Come on, Harry, I sleep at the — 
at the top — ” 

Ron had gone a nasty greenish color, his eyes fixed on 
the house. The other three wheeled around. 

Mrs. Weasley was marching across the yard, 
scattering chickens, and for a short, plump, kind- 

P a g e | 37 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




faced woman, it was remarkable how much she 
looked like a saber-toothed tiger. 

“Ah,” said Fred. 

“Oh, dear,” said George. 

Mrs. Weasley came to a halt in front of them, her 
hands on her hips, staring from one guilty face to the 
next. She was wearing a flowered apron with a wand 
sticking out of the pocket. 

“So,” she said. 

“ ’Morning, Mum,” said George, in what he clearly 
thought was a jaunty, winning voice. 

“Have you any idea how worried I’ve been?” said Mrs. 
Weasley in a deadly whisper. 

“Sorry, Mum, but see, we had to — ” 

All three of Mrs. Weasley’s sons were taller than she 
was, but they cowered as her rage broke over them. 

“Beds empty\ No note\ Car gone — could have crashed 
— out of my mind with worry — did you care? — 
never, as long as I’ve lived — you wait until your father 
gets home, we never had trouble like this from Bill or 
Charlie or Percy — ” 

“Perfect Percy,” muttered Fred. 

“YOU COULD DO WITH TAKING A LEAF OUT OF 
PERCY’S BOOK!” yelled Mrs. Weasley, prodding a 
finger in Fred’s chest. “You could havedied, you could 
have been seen, you could have lost your father his 
job 



Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




It seemed to go on for hours. Mrs. Weasley had 
shouted herself hoarse before she turned on Harry, 
who backed away. 

“I’m very pleased to see you, Harry, dear,” she said. 
“Come in and have some breakfast.” 

She turned and walked back into the house and 
Harry, after a nervous glance at Ron, who nodded 
encouragingly, followed her. 

The kitchen was small and rather cramped. There 
was a scrubbed wooden table and chairs in the 
middle, and Harry sat down on the edge of his seat, 
looking around. He had never been in a wizard house 
before. 

The clock on the wall opposite him had only one hand 
and no numbers at all. Written around the edge were 
things like Time to make tea, Time to feed the 
chickens, and You’re late. Books were stacked three 
deep on the mantelpiece, books with titles like Charm 
Your Own Cheese, Enchantment in Baking, and One 
Minute Feasts — It’s Magid And unless Harry’s ears 
were deceiving him, the old radio next to the sink had 
just announced that coming up was “Witching Hour, 
with the popular singing sorceress, Celestina 
Warbeck.” 

Mrs. Weasley was clattering around, cooking 
breakfast a little haphazardly, throwing dirty looks at 
her sons as she threw sausages into the frying pan. 
Every now and then she muttered things like “don’t 
know what you were thinking of,” and “never would 
have believed it.” 

“I don’t blame you, dear,” she assured Harry, tipping 
eight or nine sausages onto his plate. “Arthur and I 
have been worried about you, too. Just last night we 

Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




were saying we’d come and get you ourselves if you 
hadn’t written back to Ron by Friday. But really” (she 
was now adding three fried eggs to his plate), “flying 
an illegal car halfway across the country — anyone 
could have seen you — ” 

She flicked her wand casually at the dishes in the 
sink, which began to clean themselves, clinking 
gently in the background. 

“It was cloudy, Mum!” said Fred. 

“You keep your mouth closed while you’re eating!” 
Mrs. Weasley snapped. 

“They were starving him, Mum!” said George. 

“And you!” said Mrs. Weasley, but it was with a 
slightly softened expression that she started cutting 
Harry bread and buttering it for him. 

At that moment there was a diversion in the form of a 
small, redheaded figure in a long nightdress, who 
appeared in the kitchen, gave a small squeal, and ran 
out again. 

“Ginny,” said Ron in an undertone to Harry. “My 
sister. She’s been talking about you all summer.” 

“Yeah, she’ll be wanting your autograph, Harry,” Fred 
said with a grin, but he caught his mother’s eye and 
bent his face over his plate without another word. 
Nothing more was said until all four plates were 
clean, which took a surprisingly short time. 

“Blimey, I’m tired,” yawned Fred, setting down his 
knife and fork at last. “I think I’ll go to bed and — ” 



Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“You will not,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “It’s your own 
fault you’ve been up all night. You’re going to de- 
gnome the garden for me; they’re getting completely 
out of hand again — ” 

“Oh, Mum — ” 

“And you two,” she said, glaring at Ron and Fred. 

“You can go up to bed, dear,” she added to Harry. 

“You didn’t ask them to fly that wretched car — ” 

But Harry, who felt wide awake, said quickly, “I’ll help 
Ron. I’ve never seen a de-gnoming — ” 

“That’s very sweet of you, dear, but it’s dull work,” 
said Mrs. Weasley. “Now, let’s see what Lockhart’s got 
to say on the subject — ” 

And she pulled a heavy book from the stack on the 
mantelpiece. George groaned. 

“Mum, we know how to de-gnome a garden — ” 

Harry looked at the cover of Mrs. Weasley’s book. 
Written across it in fancy gold letters were the words 
Gilderoy Lockhart’s Guide to Household Pests. There 
was a big photograph on the front of a very good- 
looking wizard with wavy blond hair and bright blue 
eyes. As always in the wizarding world, the 
photograph was moving; the wizard, who Harry 
supposed was Gilderoy Lockhart, kept winking 
cheekily up at them all. Mrs. Weasley beamed down 
at him. 

“Oh, he is marvelous,” she said. “He knows his 
household pests, all right, it’s a wonderful book. ...” 

“Mum fancies him,” said Fred, in a very audible 
whisper. 

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t be so ridiculous, Fred,” said Mrs. Weasley, her 
cheeks rather pink. “All right, if you think you know 
better than Lockhart, you can go and get on with it, 
and woe betide you if there’s a single gnome in that 
garden when I come out to inspect it.” 

Yawning and grumbling, the Weasleys slouched 
outside with Harry behind them. The garden was 
large, and in Harry’s eyes, exactly what a garden 
should be. The Dursleys wouldn’t have liked it — 
there were plenty of weeds, and the grass needed 
cutting — but there were gnarled trees all around the 
walls, plants Harry had never seen spilling from every 
flower bed, and a big green pond full of frogs. 

“Muggles have garden gnomes, too, you know,” Harry 
told Ron as they crossed the lawn. 

“Yeah, I’ve seen those things they think are gnomes,” 
said Ron, bent double with his head in a peony bush, 
“like fat little Santa Clauses with fishing rods. ...” 

There was a violent scuffling noise, the peony bush 
shuddered, and Ron straightened up. “ This is a 
gnome,” he said grimly. 

“Gerroff me! Gerroff me!” squealed the gnome. 

It was certainly nothing like Santa Claus. It was small 
and leathery looking, with a large, knobby, bald head 
exactly like a potato. Ron held it at arm’s length as it 
kicked out at him with its horny little feet; he grasped 
it around the ankles and turned it upside down. 

“This is what you have to do,” he said. He raised the 
gnome above his head (“Gerroff me!”) and started to 
swing it in great circles like a lasso. Seeing the 
shocked look on Harry’s face, Ron added, “It doesn’t 



Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




hurt them — you’ve just got to make them really dizzy 
so they can’t find their way back to the gnomeholes.” 



He let go of the gnome’s ankles: It flew twenty feet 
into the air and landed with a thud in the field over 
the hedge. 

“Pitiful,” said Fred. “I bet I can get mine beyond that 
stump.” 

Harry learned quickly not to feel too sorry for the 
gnomes. He decided just to drop the first one he 
caught over the hedge, but the gnome, sensing 
weakness, sank its razor-sharp teeth into Harry’s 
finger and he had a hard job shaking it off — until — 

“Wow, Harry — that must’ve been fifty feet. ...” 

The air was soon thick with flying gnomes. 

“See, they’re not too bright,” said George, seizing five 
or six gnomes at once. “The moment they know the 
de-gnoming’s going on they storm up to have a look. 
You’d think they’d have learned by now just to stay 
put.” 

Soon, the crowd of gnomes in the field started walking 
away in a straggling line, their little shoulders 
hunched. 

“They’ll be back,” said Ron as they watched the 
gnomes disappear into the hedge on the other side of 
the field. “They love it here. ... Dad’s too soft with 
them; he thinks they’re funny. ...” 

Just then, the front door slammed. 

“He’s back!” said George. “Dad’s home!” 

Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




They hurried through the garden and back into the 
house. 

Mr. Weasley was slumped in a kitchen chair with his 
glasses off and his eyes closed. He was a thin man, 
going bald, but the little hair he had was as red as 
any of his children’s. He was wearing long green 
robes, which were dusty and travel-worn. 

“What a night,” he mumbled, groping for the teapot as 
they all sat down around him. “Nine raids. Nine! And 
old Mundungus Fletcher tried to put a hex on me 
when I had my back turned. ...” 

Mr. Weasley took a long gulp of tea and sighed. 

“Find anything, Dad?” said Fred eagerly. 

“All I got were a few shrinking door keys and a biting 
kettle,” yawned Mr. Weasley. “There was some pretty 
nasty stuff that wasn’t my department, though. 
Mortlake was taken away for questioning about some 
extremely odd ferrets, but that’s the Committee on 
Experimental Charms, thank goodness. ...” 

“Why would anyone bother making door keys 
shrink?” said George. 

“Just Muggle-baiting,” sighed Mr. Weasley. “Sell them 
a key that keeps shrinking to nothing so they can 
never find it when they need it. ... Of course, it’s very 
hard to convict anyone because no Muggle would 
admit their key keeps shrinking — they’ll insist they 
just keep losing it. Bless them, they’ll go to any 
lengths to ignore magic, even if it’s staring them in 
the face. ... But the things our lot have taken to 
enchanting, you wouldn’t believe — ” 

“LIKE CARS, FOR INSTANCE?” 

Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley had appeared, holding a long poker like 
a sword. Mr. Weasley’s eyes jerked open. He stared 
guiltily at his wife. 

“C-cars, Molly, dear?” 

“Yes, Arthur, cars,” said Mrs. Weasley, her eyes 
flashing. “Imagine a wizard buying a rusty old car and 
telling his wife all he wanted to do with it was take it 
apart to see how it worked, while really he was 
enchanting it to make it fly.” 

Mr. Weasley blinked. 

“Well, dear, I think you’ll find that he would be quite 
within the law to do that, even if — er — he maybe 
would have done better to, um, tell his wife the truth. 
... There’s a loophole in the law, you’ll find. ... As long 
as he wasn’t intending to fly the car, the fact that the 
car could fly wouldn’t — ” 

“Arthur Weasley, you made sure there was a loophole 
when you wrote that law!” shouted Mrs. Weasley. 
“Just so you could carry on tinkering with all that 
Muggle rubbish in your shed! And for your 
information, Harry arrived this morning in the car 
you weren’t intending to fly!” 

“Harry?” said Mr. Weasley blankly. “Harry who?” 

He looked around, saw Harry, and jumped. 

“Good lord, is it Harry Potter? Very pleased to meet 
you, Ron’s told us so much about — ” 

“ Your sons flew that car to Harry’s house and back 
last nighti” shouted Mrs. Weasley. “What have you got 
to say about that, eh?” 



Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Did you really?” said Mr. Weasley eagerly. “Did it go 
all right? I — I mean,” he faltered as sparks flew from 
Mrs. Weasley’s eyes, “that — that was very wrong, 
boys — very wrong indeed. ...” 

“Let’s leave them to it,” Ron muttered to Harry as 
Mrs. Weasley swelled like a bullfrog. “Come on, I’ll 
show you my bedroom.” 

They slipped out of the kitchen and down a narrow 
passageway to an uneven staircase, which wound its 
way, zigzagging up through the house. On the third 
landing, a door stood ajar. Harry just caught sight of 
a pair of bright brown eyes staring at him before it 
closed with a snap. 

“Ginny,” said Ron. “You don’t know how weird it is for 
her to be this shy. She never shuts up normally — ” 

They climbed two more flights until they reached a 
door with peeling paint and a small plaque on it, 
saying RONALD’S ROOM. 

Harry stepped in, his head almost touching the 
sloping ceiling, and blinked. It was like walking into a 
furnace: Nearly everything in Ron’s room seemed to 
be a violent shade of orange: the bedspread, the walls, 
even the ceiling. Then Harry realized that Ron had 
covered nearly every inch of the shabby wallpaper 
with posters of the same seven witches and wizards, 
all wearing bright orange robes, carrying broomsticks, 
and waving energetically. 

“Your Quidditch team?” said Harry. 

“The Chudley Cannons,” said Ron, pointing at the 
orange bedspread, which was emblazoned with two 
giant black C’s and a speeding cannonball. “Ninth in 
the league.” 

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ron’s school spellbooks were stacked untidily in a 
corner, next to a pile of comics that all seemed to 
feature The Adventures of Martin Miggs, the Mad 
Muggle. Ron’s magic wand was lying on top of a fish 
tank full of frog spawn on the windowsill, next to his 
fat gray rat, Scabbers, who was snoozing in a patch of 
sun. 

Harry stepped over a pack of Self- Shuffling playing 
cards on the floor and looked out of the tiny window. 
In the field far below he could see a gang of gnomes 
sneaking one by one back through the Weasleys’ 
hedge. Then he turned to look at Ron, who was 
watching him almost nervously, as though waiting for 
his opinion. 

“It’s a bit small,” said Ron quickly. “Not like that room 
you had with the Muggles. And I’m right underneath 
the ghoul in the attic; he’s always banging on the 
pipes and groaning. ...” 

But Harry, grinning widely, said, “This is the best 
house I’ve ever been in.” 

Ron’s ears went pink. 



Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






AT FLOURISH AND BLOTTS 

Life at the Burrow was as different as possible from 
life on Privet Drive. The Dursleys liked everything 
neat and ordered; the Weasleys’ house burst with the 
strange and unexpected. Harry got a shock the first 
time he looked in the mirror over the kitchen 
mantelpiece and it shouted, “ Tuck your shirt in, 
scruff yV’ The ghoul in the attic howled and dropped 
pipes whenever he felt things were getting too quiet, 
and small explosions from Fred and George’s 
bedroom were considered perfectly normal. What 
Harry found most unusual about life at Ron’s, 
however, wasn’t the talking mirror or the clanking 
ghoul: It was the fact that everybody there seemed to 
like him. 

Mrs. Weasley fussed over the state of his socks and 
tried to force him to eat fourth helpings at every meal. 
Mr. Weasley liked Harry to sit next to him at the 
dinner table so that he could bombard him with 
questions about life with Muggles, asking him to 
explain how things like plugs and the postal service 
worked. 

Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



“ Fascinating !” he would say as Harry talked him 
through using a telephone. “Ingenious, really, how 
many ways Muggles have found of getting along 
without magic.” 

Harry heard from Hogwarts one sunny morning about 
a week after he had arrived at the Burrow. He and 
Ron went down to breakfast to find Mr. and Mrs. 
Weasley and Ginny already sitting at the kitchen 
table. The moment she saw Harry, Ginny accidentally 
knocked her porridge bowl to the floor with a loud 
clatter. Ginny seemed very prone to knocking things 
over whenever Harry entered a room. She dived under 
the table to retrieve the bowl and emerged with her 
face glowing like the setting sun. Pretending he hadn’t 
noticed this, Harry sat down and took the toast Mrs. 
Weasley offered him. 

“Letters from school,” said Mr. Weasley, passing 
Harry and Ron identical envelopes of yellowish 
parchment, addressed in green ink. “Dumbledore 
already knows you’re here, Harry — doesn’t miss a 
trick, that man. You two’ve got them, too,” he added, 
as Fred and George ambled in, still in their pajamas. 

For a few minutes there was silence as they all read 
their letters. Harry’s told him to catch the Hogwarts 
Express as usual from King’s Cross station on 
September first. There was also a list of the new 
books he’d need for the coming year. 

SECOND-YEAR STUDENTS WILL REQUIRE: 

The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 2 by Miranda 
Goshawk 

Break with a Banshee by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Gadding with Ghouls by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 





Holidays with Hags by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Travels with Trolls by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Voyages with Vampires by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Wanderings with Werewolves by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Year with the Yeti by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Fred, who had finished his own list, peered over at 
Harry’s. 

“You’ve been told to get all Lockhart’s books, too!” he 
said. “The new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher 
must be a fan — bet it’s a witch.” 

At this point, Fred caught his mother’s eye and 
quickly busied himself with the marmalade. 

“That lot won’t come cheap,” said George, with a 
quick look at his parents. “Lockhart’s books are really 
expensive. ...” 

“Well, we’ll manage,” said Mrs. Weasley, but she 
looked worried. “I expect we’ll be able to pick up a lot 
of Ginny’s things secondhand.” 

“Oh, are you starting at Hogwarts this year?” Harry 
asked Ginny. 

She nodded, blushing to the roots of her flaming hair, 
and put her elbow in the butter dish. Fortunately no 
one saw this except Harry, because just then Ron’s 
elder brother Percy walked in. He was already 
dressed, his Hogwarts prefect badge pinned to his 
sweater vest. 

“Morning, all,” said Percy briskly. “Lovely day.” 

Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




He sat down in the only remaining chair but leapt up 
again almost immediately, pulling from underneath 
him a molting, gray feather duster — at least, that 
was what Harry thought it was, until he saw that it 
was breathing. 

“Errol!” said Ron, taking the limp owl from Percy and 
extracting a letter from under its wing. “Finally — he’s 
got Hermione’s answer. I wrote to her saying we were 
going to try and rescue you from the Dursleys.” 

He carried Errol to a perch just inside the back door 
and tried to stand him on it, but Errol flopped 
straight off again so Ron laid him on the draining 
board instead, muttering, “Pathetic.” Then he ripped 
open Hermione’s letter and read it out loud: 

“ ‘Dear Ron, and Harry if you’re there, 

“ ‘I hope everything went all right and that Harry is 
okay and that you didn’t do anything illegal to get him 
out, Ron, because that would get Harry into trouble, 
too. I’ve been really worried and if Harry is all right, 
will you please let me know at once, but perhaps it 
would be better if you used a different owl, because I 
think another delivery might finish your one off 

“ ‘I’m very busy with schoolwork, of course’ — How can 
she be?” said Ron in horror. “We’re on vacation! — 
‘and we’re going to London next Wednesday to buy my 
new books. Why don’t we meet in Diagon Alley? 

“ ‘Let me know what’s happening as soon as you can. 
Love from Hermione.’ ” 

“Well, that fits in nicely, we can go and get all your 
things then, too,” said Mrs. Weasley, starting to clear 
the table. “What ’re you all up to today?” 



Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, Ron, Fred, and George were planning to go up 
the hill to a small paddock the Weasleys owned. It 
was surrounded by trees that blocked it from view of 
the village below, meaning that they could practice 
Quidditch there, as long as they didn’t fly too high. 
They couldn’t use real Quidditch balls, which would 
have been hard to explain if they had escaped and 
flown away over the village; instead they threw apples 
for one another to catch. They took turns riding 
Harry’s Nimbus Two Thousand, which was easily the 
best broom; Ron’s old Shooting Star was often 
outstripped by passing butterflies. 

Five minutes later they were marching up the hill, 
broomsticks over their shoulders. They had asked 
Percy if he wanted to join them, but he had said he 
was busy. Harry had only seen Percy at mealtimes so 
far; he stayed shut in his room the rest of the time. 

“Wish I knew what he was up to,” said Fred, frowning. 
“He’s not himself. His exam results came the day 
before you did; twelve O.W.L.s and he hardly gloated 
at all.” 

“Ordinary Wizarding Levels,” George explained, seeing 
Harry’s puzzled look. “Bill got twelve, too. If we’re not 
careful, we’ll have another Head Boy in the family. I 
don’t think I could stand the shame.” 

Bill was the oldest Weasley brother. He and the next 
brother, Charlie, had already left Hogwarts. Harry 
had never met either of them, but knew that Charlie 
was in Romania studying dragons and Bill in Egypt 
working for the wizard’s bank, Gringotts. 

“Dunno how Mum and Dad are going to afford all our 
school stuff this year,” said George after a while. “Five 
sets of Lockhart books! And Ginny needs robes and a 
wand and everything. ...” 

Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry said nothing. He felt a bit awkward. Stored in 
an underground vault at Gringotts in London was a 
small fortune that his parents had left him. Of course, 
it was only in the wizarding world that he had money; 
you couldn’t use Galleons, Sickles, and Knuts in 
Muggle shops. He had never mentioned his Gringotts 
bank account to the Dursleys; he didn’t think their 
horror of anything connected with magic would 
stretch to a large pile of gold. 

Mrs. Weasley woke them all early the following 
Wednesday. After a quick half a dozen bacon 
sandwiches each, they pulled on their coats and Mrs. 
Weasley took a flowerpot off the kitchen mantelpiece 
and peered inside. 

“We’re running low, Arthur,” she sighed. “We’ll have 
to buy some more today. ... Ah well, guests first! After 
you, Harry dear!” 

And she offered him the flowerpot. 

Harry stared at them all watching him. 

“W-what am I supposed to do?” he stammered. 

“He’s never traveled by Floo powder,” said Ron 
suddenly. “Sorry, Harry, I forgot.” 

“Never?” said Mr. Weasley. “But how did you get to 
Diagon Alley to buy your school things last year?” 

“I went on the Underground — ” 

“Really?” said Mr. Weasley eagerly. “Were there 
escapators? How exactly — ” 



Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Not now, Arthur,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Floo powder’s 
a lot quicker, dear, but goodness me, if you’ve never 
used it before — ” 



“He’ll be all right, Mum,” said Fred. “Harry, watch us 
first.” 

He took a pinch of glittering powder out of the 
flowerpot, stepped up to the fire, and threw the 
powder into the flames. 

With a roar, the fire turned emerald green and rose 
higher than Fred, who stepped right into it, shouted, 
“Diagon Alley!” and vanished. 

“You must speak clearly, dear,” Mrs. Weasley told 
Harry as George dipped his hand into the flowerpot. 
“And be sure to get out at the right grate. ...” 

“The right what?” said Harry nervously as the fire 
roared and whipped George out of sight, too. 

“Well, there are an awful lot of wizard fires to choose 
from, you know, but as long as you’ve spoken clearly 



“He’ll be fine, Molly, don’t fuss,” said Mr. Weasley, 
helping himself to Floo powder, too. 

“But, dear, if he got lost, how would we ever explain 
to his aunt and uncle?” 

“They wouldn’t mind,” Harry reassured her. “Dudley 
would think it was a brilliant joke if I got lost up a 
chimney, don’t worry about that — ” 

“Well ... all right ... you go after Arthur,” said Mrs. 
Weasley. “Now, when you get into the fire, say where 
you’re going — ” 

Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“And keep your elbows tucked in,” Ron advised. 

“And your eyes shut,” said Mrs. Weasley. “The soot — 



“Don’t fidget,” said Ron. “Or you might well fall out of 
the wrong fireplace — ” 

“But don’t panic and get out too early; wait until you 
see Fred and George.” 

Trying hard to bear all this in mind, Harry took a 
pinch of Floo powder and walked to the edge of the 
fire. He took a deep breath, scattered the powder into 
the flames, and stepped forward; the fire felt like a 
warm breeze; he opened his mouth and immediately 
swallowed a lot of hot ash. 

“D-Dia-gon Alley,” he coughed. 

It felt as though he were being sucked down a giant 
drain. He seemed to be spinning very fast — the 
roaring in his ears was deafening — he tried to keep 
his eyes open but the whirl of green flames made him 
feel sick — something hard knocked his elbow and he 
tucked it in tightly, still spinning and spinning — now 
it felt as though cold hands were slapping his face — 
squinting through his glasses he saw a blurred 
stream of fireplaces and snatched glimpses of the 
rooms beyond — his bacon sandwiches were 
churning inside him — he closed his eyes again 
wishing it would stop, and then — 

He fell, face forward, onto cold stone and felt the 
bridge of his glasses snap. 

Dizzy and bruised, covered in soot, he got gingerly to 
his feet, holding his broken glasses up to his eyes. He 
was quite alone, but where he was, he had no idea. 

Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




All he could tell was that he was standing in the stone 
fireplace of what looked like a large, dimly lit wizard’s 
shop — but nothing in here was ever likely to be on a 
Hogwarts school list. 

A glass case nearby held a withered hand on a 
cushion, a bloodstained pack of cards, and a staring 
glass eye. Evil-looking masks stared down from the 
walls, an assortment of human bones lay upon the 
counter, and rusty, spiked instruments hung from 
the ceiling. Even worse, the dark, narrow street Harry 
could see through the dusty shop window was 
definitely not Diagon Alley. 

The sooner he got out of here, the better. Nose still 
stinging where it had hit the hearth, Harry made his 
way swiftly and silently toward the door, but before 
he’d got halfway toward it, two people appeared on 
the other side of the glass — and one of them was the 
very last person Harry wanted to meet when he was 
lost, covered in soot, and wearing broken glasses: 
Draco Malfoy. 

Harry looked quickly around and spotted a large 
black cabinet to his left; he shot inside it and pulled 
the doors closed, leaving a small crack to peer 
through. Seconds later, a bell clanged, and Malfoy 
stepped into the shop. 

The man who followed could only be Draco’s father. 

He had the same pale, pointed face and identical cold, 
gray eyes. Mr. Malfoy crossed the shop, looking lazily 
at the items on display, and rang a bell on the 
counter before turning to his son and saying, “Touch 
nothing, Draco.” 

Malfoy, who had reached for the glass eye, said, “I 
thought you were going to buy me a present.” 



Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I said I would buy you a racing broom,” said his 
father, drumming his fingers on the counter. 

“What’s the good of that if I’m not on the House 
team?” said Malfoy, looking sulky and bad-tempered. 
“Harry Potter got a Nimbus Two Thousand last year. 
Special permission from Dumbledore so he could play 
for Gryffindor. He’s not even that good, it’s just 
because he’s famous ... famous for having a stupid 
scar on his forehead. ...” 

Malfoy bent down to examine a shelf full of skulls. 

"... everyone thinks he’s so smart, wonderful Potter 
with his scar and his broomstick — ” 

“You have told me this at least a dozen times 
already,” said Mr. Malfoy, with a quelling look at his 
son. “And I would remind you that it is not — prudent 
— to appear less than fond of Harry Potter, not when 
most of our kind regard him as the hero who made 
the Dark Lord disappear — ah, Mr. Borgin.” 

A stooping man had appeared behind the counter, 
smoothing his greasy hair back from his face. 

“Mr. Malfoy, what a pleasure to see you again,” said 
Mr. Borgin in a voice as oily as his hair. “Delighted — 
and young Master Malfoy, too — charmed. How may I 
be of assistance? I must show you, just in today, and 
very reasonably priced — ” 

“I’m not buying today, Mr. Borgin, but selling,” said 
Mr. Malfoy. 

“Selling?” The smile faded slightly from Mr. Borgin ’s 
face. 



Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“You have heard, of course, that the Ministry is 
conducting more raids,” said Mr. Malfoy, taking a roll 
of parchment from his inside pocket and unraveling it 
for Mr. Borgin to read. “I have a few — ah — items at 
home that might embarrass me, if the Ministry were 
to call. ...” 

Mr. Borgin fixed a pair of pince-nez to his nose and 
looked down the list. 

“The Ministry wouldn’t presume to trouble you, sir, 
surely?” 

Mr. Malfoy’s lip curled. 

“I have not been visited yet. The name Malfoy still 
commands a certain respect, yet the Ministry grows 
ever more meddlesome. There are rumors about a 
new Muggle Protection Act — no doubt that flea- 
bitten, Muggle-loving fool Arthur Weasley is behind it 



Harry felt a hot surge of anger. 

“ — and as you see, certain of these poisons might 
make it appear — ” 

“I understand, sir, of course,” said Mr. Borgin. “Let 
me see ...” 

“Can I have that?” interrupted Draco, pointing at the 
withered hand on its cushion. 

“Ah, the Hand of Glory!” said Mr. Borgin, abandoning 
Mr. Malfoy’s list and scurrying over to Draco. “Insert a 
candle and it gives light only to the holder! Best friend 
of thieves and plunderers! Your son has fine taste, 
sir.” 



Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I hope my son will amount to more than a thief or a 
plunderer, Borgin,” said Mr. Malfoy coldly, and Mr. 
Borgin said quickly, “No offense, sir, no offense meant 



“Though if his grades don’t pick up,” said Mr. Malfoy, 
more coldly still, “that may indeed be all he is fit for 



“It’s not my fault,” retorted Draco. “The teachers all 
have favorites, that Hermione Granger — ” 

“I would have thought you’d be ashamed that a girl of 
no wizard family beat you in every exam,” snapped 
Mr. Malfoy. 

“Ha!” said Harry under his breath, pleased to see 
Draco looking both abashed and angry. 

“It’s the same all over,” said Mr. Borgin, in his oily 
voice. “Wizard blood is counting for less everywhere — 



“Not with me,” said Mr. Malfoy, his long nostrils 
flaring. 

“No, sir, nor with me, sir,” said Mr. Borgin, with a 
deep bow. 

“In that case, perhaps we can return to my list,” said 
Mr. Malfoy shortly. “I am in something of a hurry, 
Borgin, I have important business elsewhere today — ” 

They started to haggle. Harry watched nervously as 
Draco drew nearer and nearer to his hiding place, 
examining the objects for sale. Draco paused to 
examine a long coil of hangman’s rope and to read, 
smirking, the card propped on a magnificent necklace 



Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




of opals, Caution: Do Not Touch. Cursed — Has 
Claimed the Lives of Nineteen Muggle Owners to Date. 



Draco turned away and saw the cabinet right in front 
of him. He walked forward — he stretched out his 
hand for the handle — 

“Done,” said Mr. Malfoy at the counter. “Come, Draco 



Harry wiped his forehead on his sleeve as Draco 
turned away. 

“Good day to you, Mr. Borgin. Ill expect you at the 
manor tomorrow to pick up the goods.” 

The moment the door had closed, Mr. Borgin dropped 
his oily manner. 

“Good day yourself, Mister Malfoy, and if the stories 
are true, you haven’t sold me half of what’s hidden in 
your manor. ...” 

Muttering darkly, Mr. Borgin disappeared into a back 
room. Harry waited for a minute in case he came 
back, then, quietly as he could, slipped out of the 
cabinet, past the glass cases, and out of the shop 
door. 

Clutching his broken glasses to his face, Harry stared 
around. He had emerged into a dingy alleyway that 
seemed to be made up entirely of shops devoted to the 
Dark Arts. The one he’d just left, Borgin and Burkes, 
looked like the largest, but opposite was a nasty 
window display of shrunken heads and, two doors 
down, a large cage was alive with gigantic black 
spiders. Two shab by-looking wizards were watching 
him from the shadow of a doorway, muttering to each 
other. Feeling jumpy, Harry set off, trying to hold his 
Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




glasses on straight and hoping against hope he’d be 
able to find a way out of here. 

An old wooden street sign hanging over a shop selling 
poisonous candles told him he was in Knockturn 
Alley. This didn’t help, as Harry had never heard of 
such a place. He supposed he hadn’t spoken clearly 
enough through his mouthful of ashes back in the 
Weasleys’ fire. Trying to stay calm, he wondered what 
to do. 

“Not lost are you, my dear?” said a voice in his ear, 
making him jump. 

An aged witch stood in front of him, holding a tray of 
what looked horribly like whole human fingernails. 

She leered at him, showing mossy teeth. Harry 
backed away. 

“I’m fine, thanks,” he said. “I’m just — ” 

“HARRY! What d’yeh think yer doin’ down there?” 

Harry’s heart leapt. So did the witch; a load of 
fingernails cascaded down over her feet and she 
cursed as the massive form of Hagrid, the Hogwarts 
gamekeeper, came striding toward them, beetle-black 
eyes flashing over his great bristling beard. 

“Hagrid!” Harry croaked in relief. “I was lost — Floo 
powder — ” 

Hagrid seized Harry by the scruff of the neck and 
pulled him away from the witch, knocking the tray 
right out of her hands. Her shrieks followed them all 
the way along the twisting alleyway out into bright 
sunlight. Harry saw a familiar, snow-white marble 
building in the distance — Gringotts Bank. Hagrid 
had steered him right into Diagon Alley. 

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Yer a mess!” said Hagrid gruffly, brushing soot off 
Harry so forcefully he nearly knocked him into a 
barrel of dragon dung outside an apothecary. 

“Skulkin’ around Knockturn Alley, I dunno — dodgy 
place, Harry — don’ want no one ter see yeh down 
there — ” 

“I realized that,” said Harry, ducking as Hagrid made 
to brush him off again. “I told you, I was lost — what 
were you doing down there, anyway?” 

“ I was lookin’ fer a Flesh-Eatin’ Slug Repellent,” 
growled Hagrid. “They’re ruinin’ the school cabbages. 
Yer not on yer own?” 

“I’m staying with the Weasleys but we got separated,” 
Harry explained. “I’ve got to go and find them. ...” 

They set off together down the street. 

“How come yeh never wrote back ter me?” said Hagrid 
as Harry jogged alongside him (he had to take three 
steps to every stride of Hagrid ’s enormous boots). 
Harry explained all about Dobby and the Dursleys. 

“Lousy Muggles,” growled Hagrid. “If I’d’ve known — ” 

“Harry! Harry! Over here!” 

Harry looked up and saw Hermione Granger standing 
at the top of the white flight of steps to Gringotts. She 
ran down to meet them, her bushy brown hair flying 
behind her. 

“What happened to your glasses? Hello, Hagrid — Oh, 
it’s wonderful to see you two again — Are you coming 
into Gringotts, Harry?” 

“As soon as I’ve found the Weasleys,” said Harry. 

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeh won’t have long ter wait,” Hagrid said with a 
grin. 

Harry and Hermione looked around: Sprinting up the 
crowded street were Ron, Fred, George, Percy, and 
Mr. Weasley. 

“Harry,” Mr. Weasley panted. “We hoped you’d only 
gone one grate too far. ...” He mopped his glistening 
bald patch. “Molly’s frantic — she’s coming now — ” 

“Where did you come out?” Ron asked. 

“Knockturn Alley,” said Hagrid grimly. 

“Excellent.” said Fred and George together. 

“We’ve never been allowed in,” said Ron enviously. 

“I should ruddy well think not,” growled Hagrid. 

Mrs. Weasley now came galloping into view, her 
handbag swinging wildly in one hand, Ginny just 
clinging onto the other. 

“Oh, Harry — oh, my dear — you could have been 
anywhere — ” 

Gasping for breath she pulled a large clothes brush 
out of her bag and began sweeping off the soot Hagrid 
hadn’t managed to beat away. Mr. Weasley took 
Harry’s glasses, gave them a tap of his wand, and 
returned them, good as new. 

“Well, gotta be off,” said Hagrid, who was having his 
hand wrung by Mrs. Weasley (“Knockturn Alley! If you 
hadn’t found him, Hagrid!”). “See yer at Hogwarts!” 
And he strode away, head and shoulders taller than 
anyone else in the packed street. 

Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Guess who I saw in Borgin and Burkes?” Harry 
asked Ron and Hermione as they climbed the 
Gringotts steps. “Malfoy and his father.” 

“Did Lucius Malfoy buy anything?” said Mr. Weasley 
sharply behind them. 

“No, he was selling — ” 

“So he’s worried,” said Mr. Weasley with grim 
satisfaction. “Oh, I’d love to get Lucius Malfoy for 
something. ...” 

“You be careful, Arthur,” said Mrs. Weasley sharply 
as they were bowed into the bank by a goblin at the 
door. “That family’s trouble. Don’t go biting off more 
than you can chew — ” 

“So you don’t think I’m a match for Lucius Malfoy?” 
said Mr. Weasley indignantly, but he was distracted 
almost at once by the sight of Hermione’s parents, 
who were standing nervously at the counter that ran 
all along the great marble hall, waiting for Hermione 
to introduce them. 

“But you’re Mugglesl” said Mr. Weasley delightedly. 
“We must have a drink! What’s that you’ve got there? 
Oh, you’re changing Muggle money. Molly, look!” He 
pointed excitedly at the ten-pound notes in Mr. 
Granger’s hand. 

“Meet you back here,” Ron said to Hermione as the 
Weasleys and Harry were led off to their underground 
vaults by another Gringotts goblin. 

The vaults were reached by means of small, goblin- 
driven carts that sped along minature train tracks 
through the bank’s underground tunnels. Harry 
enjoyed the breakneck journey down to the Weasleys’ 

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




vault, but felt dreadful, far worse than he had in 
Knock- turn Alley, when it was opened. There was a 
very small pile of silver Sickles inside, and just one 
gold Galleon. Mrs. Weasley felt right into the corners 
before sweeping the whole lot into her bag. Harry felt 
even worse when they reached his vault. He tried to 
block the contents from view as he hastily shoved 
handfuls of coins into a leather bag. 

Back outside on the marble steps, they all separated. 
Percy muttered vaguely about needing a new quill. 
Fred and George had spotted their friend from 
Hogwarts, Lee Jordan. Mrs. Weasley and Ginny were 
going to a secondhand robe shop. Mr. Weasley was 
insisting on taking the Grangers off to the Leaky 
Cauldron for a drink. 

“Well all meet at Flourish and Blotts in an hour to 
buy your schoolbooks,” said Mrs. Weasley, setting off 
with Ginny. “And not one step down Knockturn 
Alley!” she shouted at the twins’ retreating backs. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione strolled off along the 
winding, cobbled street. The bag of gold, silver, and 
bronze jangling cheerfully in Harry’s pocket was 
clamoring to be spent, so he bought three large 
strawberry-and-peanut-butter ice creams, which they 
slurped happily as they wandered up the alley, 
examining the fascinating shop windows. Ron gazed 
longingly at a full set of Chudley Cannon robes in the 
windows of Quality Quidditch Supplies until 
Hermione dragged them off to buy ink and parchment 
next door. In Gambol and Japes Wizarding Joke 
Shop, they met Fred, George, and Lee Jordan, who 
were stocking up on Dr. Filibuster’s Fabulous Wet- 
Start, No-Heat Fireworks, and in a tiny junk shop full 
of broken wands, lopsided brass scales, and old 
cloaks covered in potion stains they found Percy, 



Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




deeply immersed in a small and deeply boring book 
called Prefects Who Gained Power. 

“A study of Hogwarts prefects and their later careers,” 
Ron read aloud off the back cover. “That sounds 
fascinating. ...” 

“Go away,” Percy snapped. 

“ ’Course, he’s very ambitious, Percy, he’s got it all 
planned out. ... He wants to be Minister of Magic ...” 
Ron told Harry and Hermione in an undertone as they 
left Percy to it. 

An hour later, they headed for Flourish and Blotts. 
They were by no means the only ones making their 
way to the bookshop. As they approached it, they saw 
to their surprise a large crowd jostling outside the 
doors, trying to get in. The reason for this was 
proclaimed by a large banner stretched across the 
upper windows: 

GILDEROY LOCKHART 

will be signing copies of his autobiography 

MAGICAL ME 

today 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. 

“We can actually meet him!” Hermione squealed. “I 
mean, he’s written almost the whole booklist!” 

The crowd seemed to be made up mostly of witches 
around Mrs. Weasley’s age. A harassed-looking wizard 
stood at the door, saying, “Calmly, please, ladies. ... 
Don’t push, there ... mind the books, now. ...” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione squeezed inside. A long 
line wound right to the back of the shop, where 
Gilderoy Lockhart was signing his books. They each 

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




grabbed a copy of The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 
2 and sneaked up the line to where the rest of the 
Weasleys were standing with Mr. and Mrs. Granger. 

“Oh, there you are, good,” said Mrs. Weasley. She 
sounded breathless and kept patting her hair. “Well 
be able to see him in a minute. ...” 

Gilderoy Lockhart came slowly into view, seated at a 
table surrounded by large pictures of his own face, all 
winking and flashing dazzlingly white teeth at the 
crowd. The real Lockhart was wearing robes of forget- 
me-not blue that exactly matched his eyes; his 
pointed wizard’s hat was set at a jaunty angle on his 
wavy hair. 

A short, irritable-looking man was dancing around 
taking photographs with a large black camera that 
emitted puffs of purple smoke with every blinding 
flash. 

“Out of the way, there,” he snarled at Ron, moving 
back to get a better shot. “This is for the Daily Prophet 



“Big deal,” said Ron, rubbing his foot where the 
photographer had stepped on it. 

Gilderoy Lockhart heard him. He looked up. He saw 
Ron — and then he saw Harry. He stared. Then he 
leapt to his feet and positively shouted, “It can’t be 
Harry Potter?” 

The crowd parted, whispering excitedly; Lockhart 
dived forward, seized Harry’s arm, and pulled him to 
the front. The crowd burst into applause. Harry’s face 
burned as Lockhart shook his hand for the 
photographer, who was clicking away madly, wafting 
thick smoke over the Weasleys. 

Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Nice big smile, Harry,” said Lockhart, through his 
own gleaming teeth. “Together, you and I are worth 
the front page.” 

When he finally let go of Harry’s hand, Harry could 
hardly feel his fingers. He tried to sidle back over to 
the Weasleys, but Lockhart threw an arm around his 
shoulders and clamped him tightly to his side. 

“Ladies and gentlemen,” he said loudly, waving for 
quiet. “What an extraordinary moment this is! The 
perfect moment for me to make a little announcement 
I’ve been sitting on for some time! 

“When young Harry here stepped into Flourish and 
Blotts today, he only wanted to buy my autobiography 
— which I shall be happy to present him now, free of 
charge — ” The crowd applauded again. “He had no 
idea,” Lockhart continued, giving Harry a little shake 
that made his glasses slip to the end of his nose, “that 
he would shortly be getting much, much more than 
my book, Magical Me. He and his schoolmates will, in 
fact, be getting the real magical me. Yes, ladies and 
gentlemen, I have great pleasure and pride in 
announcing that this September, I will be taking up 
the post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher at 
Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry!” 

The crowd cheered and clapped and Harry found 
himself being presented with the entire works of 
Gilderoy Lockhart. Staggering slightly under their 
weight, he managed to make his way out of the 
limelight to the edge of the room, where Ginny was 
standing next to her new cauldron. 

“You have these,” Harry mumbled to her, tipping the 
books into the cauldron. “I’ll buy my own — ” 



Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Bet you loved that, didn’t you, Potter?” said a voice 
Harry had no trouble recognizing. He straightened up 
and found himself face-to-face with Draco Malfoy, 
who was wearing his usual sneer. 

“Famous Harry Potter,” said Malfoy. “Can’t even go 
into a bookshop without making the front page.” 

“Leave him alone, he didn’t want all that!” said Ginny. 
It was the first time she had spoken in front of Harry. 
She was glaring at Malfoy. 

“Potter, you’ve got yourself a girlfriend).” drawled 
Malfoy. Ginny went scarlet as Ron and Hermione 
fought their way over, both clutching stacks of 
Lockhart’s books. 

“Oh, it’s you,” said Ron, looking at Malfoy as if he 
were something unpleasant on the sole of his shoe. 
“Bet you’re surprised to see Harry here, eh?” 

“Not as surprised as I am to see you in a shop, 
Weasley,” retorted Malfoy. “I suppose your parents 
will go hungry for a month to pay for all those.” 

Ron went as red as Ginny. He dropped his books into 
the cauldron, too, and started toward Malfoy, but 
Harry and Hermione grabbed the back of his jacket. 

“Ron!” said Mr. Weasley, struggling over with Fred 
and George. “What are you doing? It’s too crowded in 
here, let’s go outside.” 

“Well, well, well — Arthur Weasley.” 

It was Mr. Malfoy. He stood with his hand on Draco’s 
shoulder, sneering in just the same way. 

“Lucius,” said Mr. Weasley, nodding coldly. 

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Busy time at the Ministry, I hear,” said Mr. Malfoy. 
“All those raids ... I hope they’re paying you 
overtime?” 

He reached into Ginny’s cauldron and extracted, from 
amid the glossy Lockhart books, a very old, very 
battered copy of A Beginner’s Guide to Transfiguration. 

“Obviously not,” Mr. Malfoy said. “Dear me, what’s 
the use of being a disgrace to the name of wizard if 
they don’t even pay you well for it?” 

Mr. Weasley flushed darker than either Ron or Ginny. 

“We have a very different idea of what disgraces the 
name of wizard, Malfoy,” he said. 

“Clearly,” said Mr. Malfoy, his pale eyes straying to 
Mr. and Mrs. Granger, who were watching 
apprehensively. “The company you keep, Weasley ... 
and I thought your family could sink no lower — ” 

There was a thud of metal as Ginny’s cauldron went 
flying; Mr. Weasley had thrown himself at Mr. Malfoy, 
knocking him backward into a bookshelf. Dozens of 
heavy spellbooks came thundering down on all their 
heads; there was a yell of, “Get him, Dad!” from Fred 
or George; Mrs. Weasley was shrieking, “No, Arthur, 
no!”; the crowd stampeded backward, knocking more 
shelves over; “Gentlemen, please — please!” cried the 
assistant, and then, louder than all — 

“Break it up, there, gents, break it up — ” 

Hagrid was wading toward them through the sea of 
books. In an instant he had pulled Mr. Weasley and 
Mr. Malfoy apart. Mr. Weasley had a cut lip and Mr. 
Malfoy had been hit in the eye by an Encyclopedia of 
Toadstools. He was still holding Ginny’s old 
Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Transfiguration book. He thrust it at her, his eyes 
glittering with malice. 

“Here, girl — take your book — it’s the best your 
father can give you — ” Pulling himself out of Hagrid’s 
grip he beckoned to Draco and swept from the shop. 

“Yeh should’ve ignored him, Arthur,” said Hagrid, 
almost lifting Mr. Weasley off his feet as he 
straightened his robes. “Rotten ter the core, the whole 
family, everyone knows that — no Malfoy’s worth 
listenin’ ter — bad blood, that’s what it is — come on 
now — let’s get outta here.” 

The assistant looked as though he wanted to stop 
them from leaving, but he barely came up to Hagrid’s 
waist and seemed to think better of it. They hurried 
up the street, the Grangers shaking with fright and 
Mrs. Weasley beside herself with fury. 

“A fine example to set for your children . . . brawling in 
public ... what Gilderoy Lockhart must’ve thought — ” 

“He was pleased,” said Fred. “Didn’t you hear him as 
we were leaving? He was asking that bloke from the 
Daily Prophet if he’d be able to work the fight into his 
report — said it was all publicity — ” 

But it was a subdued group that headed back to the 
fireside in the Leaky Cauldron, where Harry, the 
Weasleys, and all their shopping would be traveling 
back to the Burrow using Floo powder. They said 
good-bye to the Grangers, who were leaving the pub 
for the Muggle street on the other side; Mr. Weasley 
started to ask them how bus stops worked, but 
stopped quickly at the look on Mrs. Weasley’s face. 



Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry took off his glasses and put them safely in his 
pocket before helping himself to Floo powder. It 
definitely wasn’t his favorite way to travel. 



Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




5 




THE WHOMPING WILLOW 

The end of the summer vacation came too quickly for 
Harry’s liking. He was looking forward to getting back 
to Hogwarts, but his month at the Burrow had been 
the happiest of his life. It was difficult not to feel 
jealous of Ron when he thought of the Dursleys and 
the sort of welcome he could expect next time he 
turned up on Privet Drive. 

On their last evening, Mrs. Weasley conjured up a 
sumptuous dinner that included all of Harry’s favorite 
things, ending with a mouthwatering treacle pudding. 
Fred and George rounded off the evening with a 
display of Filibuster fireworks; they filled the kitchen 
with red and blue stars that bounced from ceiling to 
wall for at least half an hour. Then it was time for a 
last mug of hot chocolate and bed. 

It took a long while to get started next morning. They 
were up at dawn, but somehow they still seemed to 
have a great deal to do. Mrs. Weasley dashed about in 
a bad mood looking for spare socks and quills; people 
kept colliding on the stairs, half-dressed with bits of 
Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



toast in their hands; and Mr. Weasley nearly broke 
his neck, tripping over a stray chicken as he crossed 
the yard carrying Ginny’s trunk to the car. 

Harry couldn’t see how eight people, six large trunks, 
two owls, and a rat were going to fit into one small 
Ford Anglia. He had reckoned, of course, without the 
special features that Mr. Weasley had added. 

“Not a word to Molly,” he whispered to Harry as he 
opened the trunk and showed him how it had been 
magically expanded so that the luggage fitted easily. 

When at last they were all in the car, Mrs. Weasley 
glanced into the back seat, where Harry, Ron, Fred, 
George, and Percy were all sitting comfortably side by 
side, and said, “Muggles do know more than we give 
them credit for, don’t they?” She and Ginny got into 
the front seat, which had been stretched so that it 
resembled a park bench. “I mean, you’d never know it 
was this roomy from the outside, would you?” 

Mr. Weasley started up the engine and they trundled 
out of the yard, Harry turning back for a last look at 
the house. He barely had time to wonder when he’d 
see it again when they were back — George had 
forgotten his box of Filibuster fireworks. Five minutes 
after that, they skidded to a halt in the yard so that 
Fred could run in for his broomstick. They had 
almost reached the highway when Ginny shrieked 
that she’d left her diary. By the time she had 
clambered back into the car, they were running very 
late, and tempers were running high. 

Mr. Weasley glanced at his watch and then at his 
wife. 

“Molly, dear — ” 



Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“No, Arthur — ” 



“No one would see — this little button here is an 
Invisibility Booster I installed — that’d get us up in 
the air — then we fly above the clouds. We’d be there 
in ten minutes and no one would be any the wiser — ” 

“I said no, Arthur, not in broad daylight — ” 

They reached King’s Cross at a quarter to eleven. Mr. 
Weasley dashed across the road to get trolleys for 
their trunks and they all hurried into the station. 

Harry had caught the Hogwarts Express the previous 
year. The tricky part was getting onto platform nine 
and three-quarters, which wasn’t visible to the 
Muggle eye. What you had to do was walk through 
the solid barrier dividing platforms nine and ten. It 
didn’t hurt, but it had to be done carefully so that 
none of the Muggles noticed you vanishing. 

“Percy first,” said Mrs. Weasley, looking nervously at 
the clock overhead, which showed they had only five 
minutes to disappear casually through the barrier. 

Percy strode briskly forward and vanished. Mr. 
Weasley went next; Fred and George followed. 

“I’ll take Ginny and you two come right after us,” Mrs. 
Weasley told Harry and Ron, grabbing Ginny’s hand 
and setting off. In the blink of an eye they were gone. 

“Let’s go together, we’ve only got a minute,” Ron said 
to Harry. 

Harry made sure that Hedwig’s cage was safely 
wedged on top of his trunk and wheeled his trolley 
around to face the barrier. He felt perfectly confident; 
this wasn’t nearly as uncomfortable as using Floo 

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




powder. Both of them bent low over the handles of 
their trolleys and walked purposefully toward the 
barrier, gathering speed. A few feet away from it, they 
broke into a run and — 

CRASH. 

Both trolleys hit the barrier and bounced backward; 
Ron’s trunk fell off with a loud thump, Harry was 
knocked off his feet, and Hedwig’s cage bounced onto 
the shiny floor, and she rolled away, shrieking 
indignantly; people all around them stared and a 
guard nearby yelled, “What in blazes d’you think 
you’re doing?” 

“Lost control of the trolley,” Harry gasped, clutching 
his ribs as he got up. Ron ran to pick up Hedwig, who 
was causing such a scene that there was a lot of 
muttering about cruelty to animals from the 
surrounding crowd. 

“Why can’t we get through?” Harry hissed to Ron. 

“I dunno — ” 

Ron looked wildly around. A dozen curious people 
were still watching them. 

“We’re going to miss the train,” Ron whispered. “I 
don’t understand why the gateway’s sealed itself — ” 

Harry looked up at the giant clock with a sickening 
feeling in the pit of his stomach. Ten seconds ... nine 
seconds ... 

He wheeled his trolley forward cautiously until it was 
right against the barrier and pushed with all his 
might. The metal remained solid. 



Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Three seconds ... two seconds ... one second ... 

“It’s gone,” said Ron, sounding stunned. “The train’s 
left. What if Mum and Dad can’t get back through to 
us? Have you got any Muggle money?” 

Harry gave a hollow laugh. “The Dursleys haven’t 
given me pocket money for about six years.” 

Ron pressed his ear to the cold barrier. 

“Can’t hear a thing,” he said tensely. “What’re we 
going to do? I don’t know how long it’ll take Mum and 
Dad to get back to us.” 

They looked around. People were still watching them, 
mainly because of Hedwig’s continuing screeches. 

“I think we’d better go and wait by the car,” said 
Harry. “We’re attracting too much atten — ” 

“Harry!” said Ron, his eyes gleaming. “The car!” 

“What about it?” 

“We can fly the car to Hogwarts!” 

“But I thought — ” 

“We’re stuck, right? And we’ve got to get to school, 
haven’t we? And even underage wizards are allowed to 
use magic if it’s a real emergency, section nineteen or 
something of the Restriction of Thingy — ” 

“But your mum and dad ...” said Harry, pushing 
against the barrier again in the vain hope that it 
would give way. “How will they get home?” 



Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“They don’t need the car!” said Ron impatiently. “They 
know how to Apparate! You know, just vanish and 
reappear at home! They only bother with Floo powder 
and the car because we’re all underage and we’re not 
allowed to Apparate yet. ...” 

Harry’s feeling of panic turned suddenly to 
excitement. 

“Can you fly it?” 

“No problem,” said Ron, wheeling his trolley around to 
face the exit. “C’mon, let’s go. If we hurry we’ll be able 
to follow the Hogwarts Express — ” 

And they marched off through the crowd of curious 
Muggles, out of the station and back onto the side 
road where the old Ford Anglia was parked. 

Ron unlocked the cavernous trunk with a series of 
taps from his wand. They heaved their luggage back 
in, put Hedwig on the back seat, and got into the 
front. 

“Check that no one’s watching,” said Ron, starting the 
ignition with another tap of his wand. Harry stuck his 
head out of the window: Traffic was rumbling along 
the main road ahead, but their street was empty. 

“Okay,” he said. 

Ron pressed a tiny silver button on the dashboard. 
The car around them vanished — and so did they. 
Harry could feel the seat vibrating beneath him, hear 
the engine, feel his hands on his knees and his 
glasses on his nose, but for all he could see, he had 
become a pair of eyeballs, floating a few feet above the 
ground in a dingy street full of parked cars. 



Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Let’s go,” said Ron’s voice from his right. 



And the ground and the dirty buildings on either side 
fell away, dropping out of sight as the car rose; in 
seconds, the whole of London lay, smoky and 
glittering, below them. 

Then there was a popping noise and the car, Harry, 
and Ron reappeared. 

“Uh-oh,” said Ron, jabbing at the Invisibility Booster. 
“It’s faulty — ” 

Both of them pummeled it. The car vanished. Then it 
flickered back again. 

“Hold on!” Ron yelled, and he slammed his foot on the 
accelerator; they shot straight into the low, woolly 
clouds and everything turned dull and foggy. 

“Now what?” said Harry, blinking at the solid mass of 
cloud pressing in on them from all sides. 

“We need to see the train to know what direction to go 
in,” said Ron. 

“Dip back down again — quickly — ” 

They dropped back beneath the clouds and twisted 
around in their seats, squinting at the ground. 

“I can see it!” Harry yelled. “Right ahead — there!” 

The Hogwarts Express was streaking along below 
them like a scarlet snake. 

“Due north,” said Ron, checking the compass on the 
dashboard. “Okay, we’ll just have to check on it every 
half hour or so — hold on — ” 

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




And they shot up through the clouds. A minute later, 
they burst out into a blaze of sunlight. 

It was a different world. The wheels of the car 
skimmed the sea of fluffy cloud, the sky a bright, 
endless blue under the blinding white sun. 

“All we’ve got to worry about now are airplanes,” said 
Ron. 

They looked at each other and started to laugh; for a 
long time, they couldn’t stop. 

It was as though they had been plunged into a 
fabulous dream. This, thought Harry, was surely the 
only way to travel — past swirls and turrets of snowy 
cloud, in a car full of hot, bright sunlight, with a fat 
pack of toffees in the glove compartment, and the 
prospect of seeing Fred’s and George’s jealous faces 
when they landed smoothly and spectacularly on the 
sweeping lawn in front of Hogwarts castle. 

They made regular checks on the train as they flew 
farther and farther north, each dip beneath the 
clouds showing them a different view. London was 
soon far behind them, replaced by neat green fields 
that gave way in turn to wide, purplish moors, a great 
city alive with cars like multicolored ants, villages 
with tiny toy churches. 

Several uneventful hours later, however, Harry had to 
admit that some of the fun was wearing off. The 
toffees had made them extremely thirsty and they had 
nothing to drink. He and Ron had pulled off their 
sweaters, but Harry’s T-shirt was sticking to the back 
of his seat and his glasses kept sliding down to the 
end of his sweaty nose. He had stopped noticing the 
fantastic cloud shapes now and was thinking 
longingly of the train miles below, where you could 
Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




buy ice-cold pumpkin juice from a trolley pushed by a 
plump witch. Why hadn’t they been able to get onto 
platform nine and three-quarters? 

“Can’t be much further, can it?” croaked Ron, hours 
later still, as the sun started to sink into their floor of 
cloud, staining it a deep pink. “Ready for another 
check on the train?” 

It was still right below them, winding its way past a 
snowcapped mountain. It was much darker beneath 
the canopy of clouds. 

Ron put his foot on the accelerator and drove them 
upward again, but as he did so, the engine began to 
whine. 

Harry and Ron exchanged nervous glances. 

“It’s probably just tired,” said Ron. “It’s never been 
this far before. ...” 

And they both pretended not to notice the whining 
growing louder and louder as the sky became steadily 
darker. Stars were blossoming in the blackness. 

Harry pulled his sweater back on, trying to ignore the 
way the windshield wipers were now waving feebly, as 
though in protest. 

“Not far,” said Ron, more to the car than to Harry, 

“not far now,” and he patted the dashboard 
nervously. 

When they flew back beneath the clouds a little while 
later, they had to squint through the darkness for a 
landmark they knew. 

“There!” Harry shouted, making Ron and Hedwig 
jump. “Straight ahead!” 

Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Silhouetted on the dark horizon, high on the cliff over 
the lake, stood the many turrets and towers of 
Hogwarts castle. 

But the car had begun to shudder and was losing 
speed. 

“Come on,” Ron said cajolingly, giving the steering 
wheel a little shake, “nearly there, come on — ” 

The engine groaned. Narrow jets of steam were 
issuing from under the hood. Harry found himself 
gripping the edges of his seat very hard as they flew 
toward the lake. 

The car gave a nasty wobble. Glancing out of his 
window, Harry saw the smooth, black, glassy surface 
of the water, a mile below. Ron’s knuckles were white 
on the steering wheel. The car wobbled again. 

“Come on,” Ron muttered. 

They were over the lake — the castle was right ahead 
— Ron put his foot down. 

There was a loud clunk, a splutter, and the engine 
died completely. 

“Uh-oh,” said Ron, into the silence. 

The nose of the car dropped. They were falling, 
gathering speed, heading straight for the solid castle 
wall. 

“IVoooooo!” Ron yelled, swinging the steering wheel 
around; they missed the dark stone wall by inches as 
the car turned in a great arc, soaring over the dark 
greenhouses, then the vegetable patch, and then out 
over the black lawns, losing altitude all the time. 

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ron let go of the steering wheel completely and pulled 
his wand out of his back pocket — 



“STOP! STOP!” he yelled, whacking the dashboard 
and the windshield, but they were still plummeting, 
the ground flying up toward them — 

“WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREE!” Harry bellowed, 
lunging for the steering wheel, but too late — 

CRUNCH. 

With an earsplitting bang of metal on wood, they hit 
the thick tree trunk and dropped to the ground with a 
heavy jolt. Steam was billowing from under the 
crumpled hood; Hedwig was shrieking in terror; a 
golf-ball-sized lump was throbbing on Harry’s head 
where he had hit the windshield; and to his right, Ron 
let out a low, despairing groan. 

“Are you okay?” Harry said urgently. 

“My wand,” said Ron, in a shaky voice. “Look at my 
wand — ” 

It had snapped, almost in two; the tip was dangling 
limply, held on by a few splinters. 

Harry opened his mouth to say he was sure they’d be 
able to mend it up at the school, but he never even 
got started. At that very moment, something hit his 
side of the car with the force of a charging bull, 
sending him lurching sideways into Ron, just as an 
equally heavy blow hit the roof. 

“What’s happen — ?” 

Ron gasped, staring through the windshield, and 
Harry looked around just in time to see a branch as 

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




thick as a python smash into it. The tree they had hit 
was attacking them. Its trunk was bent almost 
double, and its gnarled boughs were pummeling every 
inch of the car it could reach. 

“Aaargh!” said Ron as another twisted limb punched a 
large dent into his door; the windshield was now 
trembling under a hail of blows from knuckle-like 
twigs and a branch as thick as a battering ram was 
pounding furiously on the roof, which seemed to be 
caving — 

“Run for it!” Ron shouted, throwing his full weight 
against his door, but next second he had been 
knocked backward into Harry’s lap by a vicious 
uppercut from another branch. 

“We’re done for!” he moaned as the ceiling sagged, but 
suddenly the floor of the car was vibrating — the 
engine had restarted. 

“Reverse!” Harry yelled, and the car shot backward; 
the tree was still trying to hit them; they could hear 
its roots creaking as it almost ripped itself up, lashing 
out at them as they sped out of reach. 

“That,” panted Ron, “was close. Well done, car — ” 

The car, however, had reached the end of its tether. 
With two sharp clunks, the doors flew open and Harry 
felt his seat tip sideways: Next thing he knew he was 
sprawled on the damp ground. Loud thuds told him 
that the car was ejecting their luggage from the trunk; 
Hedwig’s cage flew through the air and burst open; 
she rose out of it with an angry screech and sped off 
toward the castle without a backward look. Then, 
dented, scratched, and steaming, the car rumbled off 
into the darkness, its rear lights blazing angrily. 



Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Come back!” Ron yelled after it, brandishing his 
broken wand. “Dad’ll kill me!” 

But the car disappeared from view with one last snort 
from its exhaust. 

“Can you believe our luck?” said Ron miserably, 
bending down to pick up Scabbers. “Of all the trees 
we could’ve hit, we had to get one that hits back.” 

He glanced over his shoulder at the ancient tree, 
which was still flailing its branches threateningly. 

“Come on,” said Harry wearily, “we’d better get up to 
the school. ...” 

It wasn’t at all the triumphant arrival they had 
pictured. Stiff, cold, and bruised, they seized the ends 
of their trunks and began dragging them up the 
grassy slope, toward the great oak front doors. 

“I think the feast’s already started,” said Ron, 
dropping his trunk at the foot of the front steps and 
crossing quietly to look through a brightly lit window. 
“Hey — Harry — come and look — it’s the Sorting!” 

Harry hurried over and, together, he and Ron peered 
in at the Great Hall. 

Innumerable candles were hovering in midair over 
four long, crowded tables, making the golden plates 
and goblets sparkle. Overhead, the bewitched ceiling, 
which always mirrored the sky outside, sparkled with 
stars. 

Through the forest of pointed black Hogwarts hats, 
Harry saw a long line of scared-looking first years 
filing into the Hall. Ginny was among them, easily 
visible because of her vivid Weasley hair. Meanwhile, 

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Professor McGonagall, a bespectacled witch with her 
hair in a tight bun, was placing the famous Hogwarts 
Sorting Hat on a stool before the newcomers. 

Every year, this aged old hat, patched, frayed, and 
dirty, sorted new students into the four Hogwarts 
houses (Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and 
Slytherin). Harry well remembered putting it on, 
exactly one year ago, and waiting, petrified, for its 
decision as it muttered aloud in his ear. For a few 
horrible seconds he had feared that the hat was going 
to put him in Slytherin, the House that had turned 
out more Dark witches and wizards than any other — 
but he had ended up in Gryffindor, along with Ron, 
Hermione, and the rest of the Weasleys. Last term, 
Harry and Ron had helped Gryffindor win the House 
Championship, beating Slytherin for the first time in 
seven years. 

A very small, mousy-haired boy had been called 
forward to place the hat on his head. Harry’s eyes 
wandered past him to where Professor Dumbledore, 
the headmaster, sat watching the Sorting from the 
staff table, his long silver beard and half-moon 
glasses shining brightly in the candlelight. Several 
seats along, Harry saw Gilderoy Lockhart, dressed in 
robes of aquamarine. And there at the end was 
Hagrid, huge and hairy, drinking deeply from his 
goblet. 

“Hang on ...” Harry muttered to Ron. “There’s an 
empty chair at the staff table. ... Where’s Snape?” 

Professor Severus Snape was Harry’s least favorite 
teacher. Harry also happened to be Snape ’s least 
favorite student. Cruel, sarcastic, and disliked by 
everybody except the students from his own House 
(Slytherin), Snape taught Potions. 



Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Maybe he’s ill!” said Ron hopefully. 

“Maybe he’s left,” said Harry, “because he missed out 
on the Defense Against the Dark Arts job again).” 

“Or he might have been sacked).” said Ron 
enthusiastically. “I mean, everyone hates him — ” 

“Or maybe,” said a very cold voice right behind them, 
“he’s waiting to hear why you two didn’t arrive on the 
school train.” 

Harry spun around. There, his black robes rippling in 
a cold breeze, stood Severus Snape. He was a thin 
man with sallow skin, a hooked nose, and greasy, 
shoulder-length black hair, and at this moment, he 
was smiling in a way that told Harry he and Ron were 
in very deep trouble. 

“Follow me,” said Snape. 

Not daring even to look at each other, Harry and Ron 
followed Snape up the steps into the vast, echoing 
entrance hall, which was lit with flaming torches. A 
delicious smell of food was wafting from the Great 
Hall, but Snape led them away from the warmth and 
light, down a narrow stone staircase that led into the 
dungeons. 

“In!” he said, opening a door halfway down the cold 
passageway and pointing. 

They entered Snape’s office, shivering. The shadowy 
walls were lined with shelves of large glass jars, in 
which floated all manner of revolting things Harry 
didn’t really want to know the name of at the 
moment. The fireplace was dark and empty. Snape 
closed the door and turned to look at them. 



Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“So,” he said softly, “the train isn’t good enough for 
the famous Harry Potter and his faithful sidekick, 
Weasley. Wanted to arrive with a bang, did we, boys?” 

“No, sir, it was the barrier at King’s Cross, it — ” 

“Silence!” said Snape coldly. “What have you done 
with the car?” 

Ron gulped. This wasn’t the first time Snape had 
given Harry the impression of being able to read 
minds. But a moment later, he understood, as Snape 
unrolled today’s issue of the Evening Prophet 

“You were seen,” he hissed, showing them the 
headline: FLYING FORD ANGLIA MYSTIFIES 
MUGGLES. He began to read aloud: “Two Muggles in 
London, convinced they saw an old car flying over the 
Post Office tower ... at noon in Norfolk, Mrs. Hetty 
Bayliss, while hanging out her washing ... Mr. Angus 
Fleet, of Peebles, reported to police ... Six or seven 
Muggles in all. I believe your father works in the 
Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office?” he said, looking 
up at Ron and smiling still more nastily. “Dear, dear 
... his own son ...” 

Harry felt as though he’d just been walloped in the 
stomach by one of the mad tree’s larger branches. If 
anyone found out Mr. Weasley had bewitched the car 
...he hadn’t thought of that. ... 

“I noticed, in my search of the park, that considerable 
damage seems to have been done to a very valuable 
Whomping Willow,” Snape went on. 

“That tree did more damage to us than we — ” Ron 
blurted out. 



Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Silence!” snapped Snape again. “Most unfortunately, 
you are not in my House and the decision to expel 
you does not rest with me. I shall go and fetch the 
people who do have that happy power. You will wait 
here.” 

Harry and Ron stared at each other, white-faced. 
Harry didn’t feel hungry anymore. He now felt 
extremely sick. He tried not to look at a large, slimy 
something suspended in green liquid on a shelf 
behind Snape ’s desk. If Snape had gone to fetch 
Professor McGonagall, head of Gryffindor House, they 
were hardly any better off. She might be fairer than 
Snape, but she was still extremely strict. 

Ten minutes later, Snape returned, and sure enough 
it was Professor McGonagall who accompanied him. 
Harry had seen Professor McGonagall angry on 
several occasions, but either he had forgotten just 
how thin her mouth could go, or he had never seen 
her this angry before. She raised her wand the 
moment she entered; Harry and Ron both flinched, 
but she merely pointed it at the empty fireplace, 
where flames suddenly erupted. 

“Sit,” she said, and they both backed into chairs by 
the fire. 

“Explain,” she said, her glasses glinting ominously. 

Ron launched into the story, starting with the barrier 
at the station refusing to let them through. 

“ — so we had no choice, Professor, we couldn’t get on 
the train.” 

“Why didn’t you send us a letter by owl? I believe you 
have an owl?” Professor McGonagall said coldly to 
Harry. 

Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry gaped at her. Now she’d said it, that seemed 
the obvious thing to have done. 



“I — I didn’t think — ” 

“That,” said Professor McGonagall, “is obvious.” 

There was a knock on the office door and Snape, now 
looking happier than ever, opened it. There stood the 
headmaster, Professor Dumbledore. 

Harry’s whole body went numb. Dumbledore was 
looking unusually grave. He stared down his very 
crooked nose at them, and Harry suddenly found 
himself wishing he and Ron were still being beaten up 
by the Whomping Willow. 

There was a long silence. Then Dumbledore said, 
“Please explain why you did this.” 

It would have been better if he had shouted. Harry 
hated the disappointment in his voice. For some 
reason, he was unable to look Dumbledore in the 
eyes, and spoke instead to his knees. He told 
Dumbledore everything except that Mr. Weasley 
owned the bewitched car, making it sound as though 
he and Ron had happened to find a flying car parked 
outside the station. He knew Dumbledore would see 
through this at once, but Dumbledore asked no 
questions about the car. When Harry had finished, he 
merely continued to peer at them through his 
spectacles. 

“Well go and get our stuff,” said Ron in a hopeless 
sort of voice. 

“What are you talking about, Weasley?” barked 
Professor McGonagall. 

Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, you’re expelling us, aren’t you?” said Ron. 

Harry looked quickly at Dumbledore. 

“Not today, Mr. Weasley,” said Dumbledore. “But I 
must impress upon both of you the seriousness of 
what you have done. I will be writing to both your 
families tonight. I must also warn you that if you do 
anything like this again, I will have no choice but to 
expel you.” 

Snape looked as though Christmas had been 
canceled. He cleared his throat and said, “Professor 
Dumbledore, these boys have flouted the Decree for 
the Restriction of Underage Wizardry, caused serious 
damage to an old and valuable tree — surely acts of 
this nature — ” 

“It will be for Professor McGonagall to decide on these 
boys’ punishments, Severus,” said Dumbledore 
calmly. “They are in her House and are therefore her 
responsibility.” He turned to Professor McGonagall. “I 
must go back to the feast, Minerva, I’ve got to give out 
a few notices. Come, Severus, there’s a delicious- 
looking custard tart I want to sample — ” 

Snape shot a look of pure venom at Harry and Ron as 
he allowed himself to be swept out of his office, 
leaving them alone with Professor McGonagall, who 
was still eyeing them like a wrathful eagle. 

“You’d better get along to the hospital wing, Weasley, 
you’re bleeding.” 

“Not much,” said Ron, hastily wiping the cut over his 
eye with his sleeve. “Professor, I wanted to watch my 
sister being Sorted — ” 



Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“The Sorting Ceremony is over,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “Your sister is also in Gryffindor.” 

“Oh, good,” said Ron. 

“And speaking of Gryffindor — ” Professor McGonagall 
said sharply, but Harry cut in: “Professor, when we 
took the car, term hadn’t started, so — so Gryffindor 
shouldn’t really have points taken from it — should 
it?” he finished, watching her anxiously. 

Professor McGonagall gave him a piercing look, but 
he was sure she had almost smiled. Her mouth 
looked less thin, anyway. 

“I will not take any points from Gryffindor,” she said, 
and Harry’s heart lightened considerably. “But you 
will both get a detention.” 

It was better than Harry had expected. As for 
Dumbledore’s writing to the Dursleys, that was 
nothing. Harry knew perfectly well they’d just be 
disappointed that the Whomping Willow hadn’t 
squashed him flat. 

Professor McGonagall raised her wand again and 
pointed it at Snape’s desk. A large plate of 
sandwiches, two silver goblets, and a jug of iced 
pumpkin juice appeared with a pop. 

“You will eat in here and then go straight up to your 
dormitory,” she said. “I must also return to the feast.” 

When the door had closed behind her, Ron let out a 
long, low whistle. 

“I thought we’d had it,” he said, grabbing a sandwich. 

“So did I,” said Harry, taking one, too. 

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Can you believe our luck, though?” said Ron thickly 
through a mouthful of chicken and ham. “Fred and 
George must’ve flown that car five or six times and no 
Muggle ever saw them.” He swallowed and took 
another huge bite. “Why couldn’t we get through the 
barrier?” 

Harry shrugged. “We’ll have to watch our step from 
now on, though,” he said, taking a grateful swig of 
pumpkin juice. “Wish we could’ve gone up to the 
feast. ...” 

“She didn’t want us showing off,” said Ron sagely. 
“Doesn’t want people to think it’s clever, arriving by 
flying car.” 

When they had eaten as many sandwiches as they 
could (the plate kept refilling itself), they rose and left 
the office, treading the familiar path to Gryffindor 
Tower. The castle was quiet; it seemed that the feast 
was over. They walked past muttering portraits and 
creaking suits of armor, and climbed narrow flights of 
stone stairs, until at last they reached the passage 
where the secret entrance to Gryffindor Tower was 
hidden, behind an oil painting of a very fat woman in 
a pink silk dress. 

“Password?” she said as they approached. 

“Er — ” said Harry. 

They didn’t know the new year’s password, not having 
met a Gryffindor prefect yet, but help came almost 
immediately; they heard hurrying feet behind them 
and turned to see Hermione dashing toward them. 

“There you are! Where have you been? The most 
ridiculous rumors — someone said you’d been 
expelled for crashing a flying car — ” 

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, we haven’t been expelled,” Harry assured her. 



“You’re not telling me you did fly here?” said 
Hermione, sounding almost as severe as Professor 
McGonagall. 

“Skip the lecture,” said Ron impatiently, “and tell us 
the new password.” 

“It’s ‘wattlebird,’ ” said Hermione impatiently, “but 
that’s not the point — ” 

Her words were cut short, however, as the portrait of 
the fat lady swung open and there was a sudden 
storm of clapping. It looked as though the whole of 
Gryffindor House was still awake, packed into the 
circular common room, standing on the lopsided 
tables and squashy armchairs, waiting for them to 
arrive. Arms reached through the portrait hole to pull 
Harry and Ron inside, leaving Hermione to scramble 
in after them. 

“Brilliant!” yelled Lee Jordan. “Inspired! What an 
entrance! Flying a car right into the Whomping 
Willow, people’ll be talking about that one for years — 



“Good for you,” said a fifth year Harry had never 
spoken to; someone was patting him on the back as 
though he’d just won a marathon; Fred and George 
pushed their way to the front of the crowd and said 
together, “Why couldn’t we’ve come in the car, eh?” 
Ron was scarlet in the face, grinning embarrassedly, 
but Harry could see one person who didn’t look happy 
at all. Percy was visible over the heads of some 
excited first years, and he seemed to be trying to get 
near enough to start telling them off. Harry nudged 
Ron in the ribs and nodded in Percy’s direction. Ron 
got the point at once. 

Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Got to get upstairs — bit tired,” he said, and the two 
of them started pushing their way toward the door on 
the other side of the room, which led to a spiral 
staircase and the dormitories. 

“ ’Night,” Harry called back to Hermione, who was 
wearing a scowl just like Percy’s. 

They managed to get to the other side of the common 
room, still having their backs slapped, and gained the 
peace of the staircase. They hurried up it, right to the 
top, and at last reached the door of their old 
dormitory, which now had a sign on it saying 
SECOND YEARS. They entered the familiar, circular 
room, with its five four-posters hung with red velvet 
and its high, narrow windows. Their trunks had been 
brought up for them and stood at the ends of their 
beds. 

Ron grinned guiltily at Harry. 

“I know I shouldn’t ’ve enjoyed that or anything, but — 



The dormitory door flew open and in came the other 
second year Gryffindor boys, Seamus Finnigan, Dean 
Thomas, and Neville Longbottom. 

“Unbelievablel” beamed Seamus. 

“Cool,” said Dean. 

“Amazing,” said Neville, awestruck. 

Harry couldn’t help it. He grinned, too. 



Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




6 




GILDEROY LOCKHART 

The next day, however, Harry barely grinned once. 
Things started to go downhill from breakfast in the 
Great Hall. The four long House tables were laden 
with tureens of porridge, plates of kippers, mountains 
of toast, and dishes of eggs and bacon, beneath the 
enchanted ceiling (today, a dull, cloudy gray). Harry 
and Ron sat down at the Gryffindor table next to 
Hermione, who had her copy of Voyages with 
Vampires propped open against a milk jug. There was 
a slight stiffness in the way she said “ ’Morning,” 
which told Harry that she was still disapproving of the 
way they had arrived. Neville Longbottom, on the 
other hand, greeted them cheerfully. Neville was a 
round-faced and accident-prone boy with the worst 
memory of anyone Harry had ever met. 

“Mail’s due any minute — I think Gran’s sending a 
few things I forgot.” 

Harry had only just started his porridge when, sure 
enough, there was a rushing sound overhead and a 
hundred or so owls streamed in, circling the hall and 

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



dropping letters and packages into the chattering 
crowd. A big, lumpy package bounced off Neville’s 
head and, a second later, something large and gray 
fell into Hermione’s jug, spraying them all with milk 
and feathers. 

“Errol\” said Ron, pulling the bedraggled owl out by 
the feet. Errol slumped, unconscious, onto the table, 
his legs in the air and a damp red envelope in his 
beak. 

“Oh, no — ” Ron gasped. 

“It’s all right, he’s still alive,” said Hermione, prodding 
Errol gently with the tip of her finger. 

“It’s not that — it’s that.” 

Ron was pointing at the red envelope. It looked quite 
ordinary to Harry, but Ron and Neville were both 
looking at it as though they expected it to explode. 

“What’s the matter?” said Harry. 

“She’s — she’s sent me a Howler,” said Ron faintly. 

“You’d better open it, Ron,” said Neville in a timid 
whisper. “It’ll be worse if you don’t. My gran sent me 
one once, and I ignored it and” — he gulped — “it was 
horrible.” 

Harry looked from their petrified faces to the red 
envelope. 

“What’s a Howler?” he said. 

But Ron’s whole attention was fixed on the letter, 
which had begun to smoke at the corners. 



Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Open it,” Neville urged. “It’ll all be over in a few 
minutes — ” 

Ron stretched out a shaking hand, eased the envelope 
from Errol’s beak, and slit it open. Neville stuffed his 
fingers in his ears. A split second later, Harry knew 
why. He thought for a moment it had exploded; a roar 
of sound filled the huge hall, shaking dust from the 
ceiling. 

“— STEALING THE CAR, I WOULDN’T HAVE BEEN 
SURPRISED IF THEY’D EXPELLED YOU, YOU WAIT 
TILL I GET HOLD OF YOU, I DON’T SUPPOSE YOU 
STOPPED TO THINK WHAT YOUR FATHER AND I 
WENT THROUGH WHEN WE SAW IT WAS GONE — ” 

Mrs. Weasley’s yells, a hundred times louder than 
usual, made the plates and spoons rattle on the table, 
and echoed deafeningly off the stone walls. People 
throughout the hall were swiveling around to see who 
had received the Howler, and Ron sank so low in his 
chair that only his crimson forehead could be seen. 

“— LETTER FROM DUMBLEDORE LAST NIGHT, I 
THOUGHT YOUR FATHER WOULD DIE OF SHAME, 

WE DIDN’T BRING YOU UP TO BEHAVE LIKE THIS, 
YOU AND HARRY COULD BOTH HAVE DIED — ” 

Harry had been wondering when his name was going 
to crop up. He tried very hard to look as though he 
couldn’t hear the voice that was making his eardrums 
throb. 

“— ABSOLUTELY DISGUSTED — YOUR FATHER’S 
FACING AN INQUIRY AT WORK, IT’S ENTIRELY YOUR 
FAULT AND IF YOU PUT ANOTHER TOE OUT OF LINE 
WE’LL BRING YOU STRAIGHT BACK HOME.” 



Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




A ringing silence fell. The red envelope, which had 
dropped from Ron’s hand, burst into flames and 
curled into ashes. Harry and Ron sat stunned, as 
though a tidal wave had just passed over them. A few 
people laughed and, gradually, a babble of talk broke 
out again. 

Hermione closed Voyages with Vampires and looked 
down at the top of Ron’s head. 

“Well, I don’t know what you expected, Ron, but you 



“Don’t tell me I deserved it,” snapped Ron. 

Harry pushed his porridge away. His insides were 
burning with guilt. Mr. Weasley was facing an inquiry 
at work. After all Mr. and Mrs. Weasley had done for 
him over the summer . . . 

But he had no time to dwell on this; Professor 
McGonagall was moving along the Gryffindor table, 
handing out course schedules. Harry took his and 
saw that they had double Herbology with the 
Hufflepuffs first. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the castle together, 
crossed the vegetable patch, and made for the 
greenhouses, where the magical plants were kept. At 
least the Howler had done one good thing: Hermione 
seemed to think they had now been punished enough 
and was being perfectly friendly again. 

As they neared the greenhouses they saw the rest of 
the class standing outside, waiting for Professor 
Sprout. Harry, Ron, and Hermione had only just 
joined them when she came striding into view across 
the lawn, accompanied by Gilderoy Lockhart. 

Professor Sprout’s arms were full of bandages, and 
Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




with another twinge of guilt, Harry spotted the 
Whomping Willow in the distance, several of its 
branches now in slings. 

Professor Sprout was a squat little witch who wore a 
patched hat over her flyaway hair; there was usually 
a large amount of earth on her clothes and her 
fingernails would have made Aunt Petunia faint. 
Gilderoy Lockhart, however, was immaculate in 
sweeping robes of turquoise, his golden hair shining 
under a perfectly positioned turquoise hat with gold 
trimming. 

“Oh, hello there!” he called, beaming around at the 

assembled students. “Just been showing Professor 

Sprout the right way to doctor a Whomping Willow! 

But I don’t want you running away with the idea that 

I’m better at Herbology than she is! I just happen to 

have met several of these exotic plants on my travels 
?? 



“Greenhouse three today, chaps!” said Professor 
Sprout, who was looking distinctly disgruntled, not at 
all her usual cheerful self. 

There was a murmur of interest. They had only ever 
worked in greenhouse one before — greenhouse three 
housed far more interesting and dangerous plants. 
Professor Sprout took a large key from her belt and 
unlocked the door. Harry caught a whiff of damp 
earth and fertilizer mingling with the heavy perfume 
of some giant, umbrella-sized flowers dangling from 
the ceiling. He was about to follow Ron and Hermione 
inside when Lockhart’s hand shot out. 

“Harry! I’ve been wanting a word — you don’t mind if 
he’s a couple of minutes late, do you, Professor 
Sprout?” 



Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Judging by Professor Sprout’s scowl, she did mind, 
but Lockhart said, “That’s the ticket,” and closed the 
greenhouse door in her face. 

“Harry,” said Lockhart, his large white teeth gleaming 
in the sunlight as he shook his head. “Harry, Harry, 
Harry.” 

Completely nonplussed, Harry said nothing. 

“When I heard — well, of course, it was all my fault. 
Could have kicked myself.” 

Harry had no idea what he was talking about. He was 
about to say so when Lockhart went on, “Don’t know 
when I’ve been more shocked. Flying a car to 
Hogwarts! Well, of course, I knew at once why you’d 
done it. Stood out a mile. Harry, Harry, Harry.” 

It was remarkable how he could show every one of 
those brilliant teeth even when he wasn’t talking. 

“Gave you a taste for publicity, didn’t I?” said 
Lockhart. “Gave you the bug. You got onto the front 
page of the paper with me and you couldn’t wait to do 
it again.” 

“Oh, no, Professor, see — ” 

“Harry, Harry, Harry,” said Lockhart, reaching out 
and grasping his shoulder. “I understand. Natural to 
want a bit more once you’ve had that first taste — 
and I blame myself for giving you that, because it was 
bound to go to your head — but see here, young man, 
you can’t start flying cars to try and get yourself 
noticed. Just calm down, all right? Plenty of time for 
all that when you’re older. Yes, yes, I know what 
you’re thinking! ‘It’s all right for him, he’s an 
internationally famous wizard already! ’ But when I 
Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




was twelve, I was just as much of a nobody as you are 
now. In fact, I’d say I was even more of a nobody! I 
mean, a few people have heard of you, haven’t they? 
All that business with He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!” 
He glanced at the lightning scar on Harry’s forehead. 

“I know, I know — it’s not quite as good as winning 
Witch Weekly’s Most-Charming-Smile Award five 
times in a row, as I have — but it’s a start, Harry, it’s 
a start” 

He gave Harry a hearty wink and strode off. Harry 
stood stunned for a few seconds, then, remembering 
he was supposed to be in the greenhouse, he opened 
the door and slid inside. 

Professor Sprout was standing behind a trestle bench 
in the center of the greenhouse. About twenty pairs of 
different-colored ear-muffs were lying on the bench. 
When Harry had taken his place between Ron and 
Hermione, she said, “We’ll be repotting Mandrakes 
today. Now, who can tell me the properties of the 
Mandrake?” 

To nobody’s surprise, Hermione’s hand was first into 
the air. 

“Mandrake, or Mandragora, is a powerful restorative,” 
said Hermione, sounding as usual as though she had 
swallowed the textbook. “It is used to return people 
who have been transfigured or cursed to their original 
state.” 

“Excellent. Ten points to Gryffindor,” said Professor 
Sprout. “The Mandrake forms an essential part of 
most antidotes. It is also, however, dangerous. Who 
can tell me why?” 

Hermione’s hand narrowly missed Harry’s glasses as 
it shot up again. 

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“The cry of the Mandrake is fatal to anyone who hears 
it,” she said promptly. 

“Precisely. Take another ten points,” said Professor 
Sprout. “Now, the Mandrakes we have here are still 
very young.” 

She pointed to a row of deep trays as she spoke, and 
everyone shuffled forward for a better look. A hundred 
or so tufty little plants, purplish green in color, were 
growing there in rows. They looked quite 
unremarkable to Harry, who didn’t have the slightest 
idea what Hermione meant by the “cry” of the 
Mandrake. 

“Everyone take a pair of earmuffs,” said Professor 
Sprout. 

There was a scramble as everyone tried to seize a pair 
that wasn’t pink and fluffy. 

“When I tell you to put them on, make sure your ears 
are completely covered,” said Professor Sprout. “When 
it is safe to remove them, I will give you the thumbs- 
up. Right — earmuffs on.” 

Harry snapped the earmuffs over his ears. They shut 
out sound completely. Professor Sprout put the pink, 
fluffy pair over her own ears, rolled up the sleeves of 
her robes, grasped one of the tufty plants firmly, and 
pulled hard. 

Harry let out a gasp of surprise that no one could 
hear. 

Instead of roots, a small, muddy, and extremely ugly 
baby popped out of the earth. The leaves were 
growing right out of his head. He had pale green, 



Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




mottled skin, and was clearly bawling at the top of his 
lungs. 

Professor Sprout took a large plant pot from under 
the table and plunged the Mandrake into it, burying 
him in dark, damp compost until only the tufted 
leaves were visible. Professor Sprout dusted off her 
hands, gave them all the thumbs-up, and removed 
her own earmuffs. 

“As our Mandrakes are only seedlings, their cries 
won’t kill yet,” she said calmly as though she’d just 
done nothing more exciting than water a begonia. 
“However, they will knock you out for several hours, 
and as I’m sure none of you want to miss your first 
day back, make sure your earmuffs are securely in 
place while you work. I will attract your attention 
when it is time to pack up. 

“Four to a tray — there is a large supply of pots here 

— compost in the sacks over there — and be careful 
of the Venomous Tentacula, it’s teething.” 

She gave a sharp slap to a spiky, dark red plant as 
she spoke, making it draw in the long feelers that had 
been inching sneakily over her shoulder. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione were joined at their tray by 
a curly-haired Hufflepuff boy Harry knew by sight but 
had never spoken to. 

“Justin Finch-Fletchley,” he said brightly, shaking 
Harry by the hand. “Know who you are, of course, the 
famous Harry Potter. ... And you’re Hermione Granger 

— always top in everything” (Hermione beamed as she 
had her hand shaken too) “ — and Ron Weasley. 
Wasn’t that your flying car?” 



Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ron didn’t smile. The Howler was obviously still on 
his mind. 

“That Lockhart’s something, isn’t he?” said Justin 
happily as they began filling their plant pots with 
dragon dung compost. “Awfully brave chap. Have you 
read his books? I’d have died of fear if I’d been 
cornered in a telephone booth by a werewolf, but he 
stayed cool and — zap — just fantastic. 

“My name was down for Eton, you know. I can’t tell 
you how glad I am I came here instead. Of course, 
Mother was slightly disappointed, but since I made 
her read Lockhart’s books I think she’s begun to see 
how useful it’ll be to have a fully trained wizard in the 
family. ...” 

After that they didn’t have much chance to talk. Their 
earmuffs were back on and they needed to 
concentrate on the Mandrakes. Professor Sprout had 
made it look extremely easy, but it wasn’t. The 
Mandrakes didn’t like coming out of the earth, but 
didn’t seem to want to go back into it either. They 
squirmed, kicked, flailed their sharp little fists, and 
gnashed their teeth; Harry spent ten whole minutes 
trying to squash a particularly fat one into a pot. 

By the end of the class, Harry, like everyone else, was 
sweaty, aching, and covered in earth. Everyone 
traipsed back to the castle for a quick wash and then 
the Gryffindors hurried off to Transfiguration. 

Professor McGonagall’s classes were always hard 
work, but today was especially difficult. Everything 
Harry had learned last year seemed to have leaked 
out of his head during the summer. He was supposed 
to be turning a beetle into a button, but all he 
managed to do was give his beetle a lot of exercise as 
it scuttled over the desktop avoiding his wand. 

Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ron was having far worse problems. He had patched 
up his wand with some borrowed Spellotape, but it 
seemed to be damaged beyond repair. It kept 
crackling and sparking at odd moments, and every 
time Ron tried to transfigure his beetle it engulfed 
him in thick gray smoke that smelled of rotten eggs. 
Unable to see what he was doing, Ron accidentally 
squashed his beetle with his elbow and had to ask for 
a new one. Professor McGonagall wasn’t pleased. 

Harry was relieved to hear the lunch bell. His brain 
felt like a wrung sponge. Everyone filed out of the 
classroom except him and Ron, who was whacking 
his wand furiously on the desk. 

“Stupid — useless — thing — ” 

“Write home for another one,” Harry suggested as the 
wand let off a volley of bangs like a firecracker. 

“Oh, yeah, and get another Howler back,” said Ron, 
stuffing the now hissing wand into his bag. “ ‘It’s your 
own fault your wand got snapped — ’ ” 

They went down to lunch, where Ron’s mood was not 
improved by Hermione’s showing them the handful of 
perfect coat buttons she had produced in 
T ransfiguration . 

“What’ve we got this afternoon?” said Harry, hastily 
changing the subject. 

“Defense Against the Dark Arts,” said Hermione at 
once. 

“Why,” demanded Ron, seizing her schedule, “have 
you outlined all Lockhart’s lessons in little hearts?” 



Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione snatched the schedule back, blushing 
furiously. 

They finished lunch and went outside into the 
overcast courtyard. Hermione sat down on a stone 
step and buried her nose in Voyages with Vampires 
again. Harry and Ron stood talking about Quidditch 
for several minutes before Harry became aware that 
he was being closely watched. Looking up, he saw the 
very small, mousy-haired boy he’d seen trying on the 
Sorting Hat last night staring at Harry as though 
transfixed. He was clutching what looked like an 
ordinary Muggle camera, and the moment Harry 
looked at him, he went bright red. 

“All right, Harry? I’m — I’m Colin Creevey,” he said 
breathlessly, taking a tentative step forward. “I’m in 
Gryffindor, too. D’you think — would it be all right if 
— can I have a picture?” he said, raising the camera 
hopefully. 

“A picture?” Harry repeated blankly. 

“So I can prove I’ve met you,” said Colin Creevey 
eagerly, edging further forward. “I know all about you. 
Everyone’s told me. About how you survived when 
You-Know-Who tried to kill you and how he 
disappeared and everything and how you’ve still got a 
lightning scar on your forehead” (his eyes raked 
Harry’s hairline) “and a boy in my dormitory said if I 
develop the film in the right potion, the pictures’ll 
move.” Colin drew a great shuddering breath of 
excitement and said, “It’s amazing here, isn’t it? I 
never knew all the odd stuff I could do was magic till I 
got the letter from Hogwarts. My dad’s a milkman, he 
couldn’t believe it either. So I’m taking loads of 
pictures to send home to him. And it’d be really good 
if I had one of you” — he looked imploringly at Harry 



Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




— “maybe your friend could take it and I could stand 
next to you? And then, could you sign it?” 

“ Signed photos? You’re giving out signed photos, 
Potter?” 

Loud and scathing, Draco Malfoy’s voice echoed 
around the courtyard. He had stopped right behind 
Colin, flanked, as he always was at Hogwarts, by his 
large and thuggish cronies, Crabbe and Goyle. 

“Everyone line up!” Malfoy roared to the crowd. “Harry 
Potter’s giving out signed photos!” 

“No, I’m not,” said Harry angrily, his fists clenching. 
“Shut up, Malfoy.” 

“You’re just jealous,” piped up Colin, whose entire 
body was about as thick as Crabbe ’s neck. 

“Jealous?” said Malfoy, who didn’t need to shout 
anymore: Half the courtyard was listening in. “Of 
what? I don’t want a foul scar right across my head, 
thanks. I don’t think getting your head cut open 
makes you that special, myself.” 

Crabbe and Goyle were sniggering stupidly. 

“Eat slugs, Malfoy,” said Ron angrily. Crabbe stopped 
laughing and started rubbing his knuckles in a 
menacing way. 

“Be careful, Weasley,” sneered Malfoy. “You don’t 
want to start any trouble or your mommy’ll have to 
come and take you away from school.” He put on a 
shrill, piercing voice. “If you put another toe out of line 



Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




A knot of Slytherin fifth years nearby laughed loudly 
at this. 

“Weasley would like a signed photo, Potter,” smirked 
Malfoy. “It’d be worth more than his family’s whole 
house — ” 

Ron whipped out his Spellotaped wand, but Hermione 
shut Voyages with Vampires with a snap and 
whispered, “Look out!” 

“What’s all this, what’s all this?” Gilderoy Lockhart 
was striding toward them, his turquoise robes 
swirling behind him. “Who’s giving out signed 
photos?” 

Harry started to speak but he was cut short as 
Lockhart flung an arm around his shoulders and 
thundered jovially, “Shouldn’t have asked! We meet 
again, Harry!” 

Pinned to Lockhart’s side and burning with 
humiliation, Harry saw Malfoy slide smirking back 
into the crowd. 

“Come on then, Mr. Creevey,” said Lockhart, beaming 
at Colin. “A double portrait, can’t do better than that, 
and well both sign it for you.” 

Colin fumbled for his camera and took the picture as 
the bell rang behind them, signaling the start of 
afternoon classes. 

“Off you go, move along there,” Lockhart called to the 
crowd, and he set off back to the castle with Harry, 
who was wishing he knew a good Vanishing Spell, 
still clasped to his side. 



Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“A word to the wise, Harry,” said Lockhart paternally 
as they entered the building through a side door. “I 
covered up for you back there with young Creevey — 
if he was photographing me, too, your schoolmates 
won’t think you’re setting yourself up so much. ...” 

Deaf to Harry’s stammers, Lockhart swept him down 
a corridor lined with staring students and up a 
staircase. 

“Let me just say that handing out signed pictures at 
this stage of your career isn’t sensible — looks a tad 
bigheaded, Harry, to be frank. There may well come a 
time when, like me, you’ll need to keep a stack handy 
wherever you go, but” — he gave a little chortle — “I 
don’t think you’re quite there yet.” 

They had reached Lockhart’s classroom and he let 
Harry go at last. Harry yanked his robes straight and 
headed for a seat at the very back of the class, where 
he busied himself with piling all seven of Lockhart’s 
books in front of him, so that he could avoid looking 
at the real thing. 

The rest of the class came clattering in, and Ron and 
Hermione sat down on either side of Harry. 

“You could’ve fried an egg on your face,” said Ron. 
“You’d better hope Creevey doesn’t meet Ginny, or 
they’ll be starting a Harry Potter fan club.” 

“Shut up,” snapped Harry. The last thing he needed 
was for Lockhart to hear the phrase “Harry Potter fan 
club.” 

When the whole class was seated, Lockhart cleared 
his throat loudly and silence fell. He reached forward, 
picked up Neville Longbottom’s copy of Travels with 



Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Trolls, and held it up to show his own, winking 
portrait on the front. 

“Me,” he said, pointing at it and winking as well. 
“Gilderoy Lockhart, Order of Merlin, Third Class, 
Honorary Member of the Dark Force Defense League, 
and five-time winner of Witch Weekly’s Most- 
Charming- Smile Award — but I don’t talk about that. 
I didn’t get rid of the Bandon Banshee by smiling at 
her!” 

He waited for them to laugh; a few people smiled 
weakly. 

“I see you’ve all bought a complete set of my books — 
well done. I thought we’d start today with a little quiz. 
Nothing to worry about — just to check how well 
you’ve read them, how much you’ve taken in — ” 

When he had handed out the test papers he returned 
to the front of the class and said, “You have thirty 
minutes — start — now\” 

Harry looked down at his paper and read: 

1. What is Gilderoy Lockhart’s favorite color? 

2. What is Gilderoy Lockhart’s secret ambition? 

3. What, in your opinion, is Gilderoy Lockhart’s 
greatest achievement to date? 

On and on it went, over three sides of paper, right 
down to: 

54. When is Gilderoy Lockhart’s birthday, and what 
would his ideal gift be? 



Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Half an hour later, Lockhart collected the papers and 
rifled through them in front of the class. 

“Tut, tut — hardly any of you remembered that my 
favorite color is lilac. I say so in Year with the Yeti. 

And a few of you need to read Wanderings with 
Werewolves more carefully — I clearly state in 
chapter twelve that my ideal birthday gift would be 
harmony between all magic and non-magic peoples — 
though I wouldn’t say no to a large bottle of Ogden’s 
Old Firewhisky!” 

He gave them another roguish wink. Ron was now 
staring at Lockhart with an expression of disbelief on 
his face; Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, who 
were sitting in front, were shaking with silent 
laughter. Hermione, on the other hand, was listening 
to Lockhart with rapt attention and gave a start when 
he mentioned her name. 

"... but Miss Hermione Granger knew my secret 
ambition is to rid the world of evil and market my 
own range of hair-care potions — good girl! In fact” — 
he flipped her paper over — “full marks! Where is 
Miss Hermione Granger?” 

Hermione raised a trembling hand. 

“Excellent!” beamed Lockhart. “Quite excellent! Take 
ten points for Gryffindor! And so — to business — ” 

He bent down behind his desk and lifted a large, 
covered cage onto it. 

“Now — be warned! It is my job to arm you against 
the foulest creatures known to wizardkind! You may 
find yourselves facing your worst fears in this room. 
Know only that no harm can befall you whilst I am 
here. All I ask is that you remain calm.” 

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




In spite of himself, Harry leaned around his pile of 
books for a better look at the cage. Lockhart placed a 
hand on the cover. Dean and Seamus had stopped 
laughing now. Neville was cowering in his front row 
seat. 

“I must ask you not to scream,” said Lockhart in a 
low voice. “It might provoke them.” 

As the whole class held its breath, Lockhart whipped 
off the cover. 

“Yes,” he said dramatically. “ Freshly caught Cornish 
pixies.” 

Seamus Finnigan couldn’t control himself. He let out 
a snort of laughter that even Lockhart couldn’t 
mistake for a scream of terror. 

“Yes?” He smiled at Seamus. 

“Well, they’re not — they’re not very — dangerous, are 
they?” Seamus choked. 

“Don’t be so sure!” said Lockhart, waggling a finger 
annoyingly at Seamus. “Devilish tricky little blighters 
they can be!” 

The pixies were electric blue and about eight inches 
high, with pointed faces and voices so shrill it was 
like listening to a lot of budgies arguing. The moment 
the cover had been removed, they had started 
jabbering and rocketing around, rattling the bars and 
making bizarre faces at the people nearest them. 

“Right, then,” Lockhart said loudly. “Let’s see what 
you make of them!” And he opened the cage. 



Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




It was pandemonium. The pixies shot in every 
direction like rockets. Two of them seized Neville by 
the ears and lifted him into the air. Several shot 
straight through the window, showering the back row 
with broken glass. The rest proceeded to wreck the 
classroom more effectively than a rampaging rhino. 
They grabbed ink bottles and sprayed the class with 
them, shredded books and papers, tore pictures from 
the walls, up-ended the waste basket, grabbed bags 
and books and threw them out of the smashed 
window; within minutes, half the class was sheltering 
under desks and Neville was swinging from the iron 
chandelier in the ceiling. 

“Come on now — round them up, round them up, 
they’re only pixies,” Lockhart shouted. 

He rolled up his sleeves, brandished his wand, and 
bellowed, “Peskipiksi Pesternomti” 

It had absolutely no effect; one of the pixies seized his 
wand and threw it out of the window, too. Lockhart 
gulped and dived under his own desk, narrowly 
avoiding being squashed by Neville, who fell a second 
later as the chandelier gave way. 

The bell rang and there was a mad rush toward the 
exit. In the relative calm that followed, Lockhart 
straightened up, caught sight of Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione, who were almost at the door, and said, 
“Well, I’ll ask you three to just nip the rest of them 
back into their cage.” He swept past them and shut 
the door quickly behind him. 

“Can you believe him?” roared Ron as one of the 
remaining pixies bit him painfully on the ear. 

“He just wants to give us some hands-on experience,” 
said Hermione, immobilizing two pixies at once with a 

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




clever Freezing Charm and stuffing them back into 
their cage. 

“Hands on?” said Harry, who was trying to grab a 
pixie dancing out of reach with its tongue out. 
“Hermione, he didn’t have a clue what he was doing 



“Rubbish,” said Hermione. “You’ve read his books — 
look at all those amazing things he’s done — ” 

“He says he’s done,” Ron muttered. 



Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




7 




MUDBLOODS AND MURMURS 

Harry spent a lot of time over the next few days 
dodging out of sight whenever he saw Gilderoy 
Lockhart coming down a corridor. Harder to avoid 
was Colin Creevey, who seemed to have memorized 
Harry’s schedule. Nothing seemed to give Colin a 
bigger thrill than to say, “All right, Harry?” six or 
seven times a day and hear, “Hello, Colin,” back, 
however exasperated Harry sounded when he said it. 

Hedwig was still angry with Harry about the 
disasterous car journey and Ron’s wand was still 
malfunctioning, surpassing itself on Friday morning 
by shooting out of Ron’s hand in Charms and hitting 
tiny old Professor Flitwick squarely between the eyes, 
creating a large, throbbing green boil where it had 
struck. So with one thing and another, Harry was 
quite glad to reach the weekend. He, Ron, and 
Hermione were planning to visit Hagrid on Saturday 
morning. Harry, however, was shaken awake several 
hours earlier than he would have liked by Oliver 
Wood, Captain of the Gryffindor Quidditch team. 

Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets- J.K. Rowling 



“Whassamatter?” said Harry groggily. 

“Quidditch practice!” said Wood. “Come on!” 

Harry squinted at the window. There was a thin mist 
hanging across the pink-and-gold sky. Now that he 
was awake, he couldn’t understand how he could 
have slept through the racket the birds were making. 

“Oliver,” Harry croaked. “It’s the crack of dawn.” 

“Exactly,” said Wood. He was a tall and burly sixth 
year and, at the moment, his eyes were gleaming with 
a crazed enthusiasm. “It’s part of our new training 
program. Come on, grab your broom, and let’s go,” 
said Wood heartily. “None of the other teams have 
started training yet; we’re going to be first off the 
mark this year — ” 

Yawning and shivering slightly, Harry climbed out of 
bed and tried to find his Quidditch robes. 

“Good man,” said Wood. “Meet you on the field in 
fifteen minutes.” 

When he’d found his scarlet team robes and pulled on 
his cloak for warmth, Harry scribbled a note to Ron 
explaining where he’d gone and went down the spiral 
staircase to the common room, his Nimbus Two 
Thousand on his shoulder. He had just reached the 
portrait hole when there was a clatter behind him and 
Colin Creevey came dashing down the spiral 
staircase, his camera swinging madly around his 
neck and something clutched in his hand. 

“I heard someone saying your name on the stairs, 
Harry! Look what I’ve got here! I’ve had it developed, I 
wanted to show you — ” 



Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry looked bemusedly at the photograph Colin was 
brandishing under his nose. 

A moving, black-and-white Lockhart was tugging hard 
on an arm Harry recognized as his own. He was 
pleased to see that his photographic self was putting 
up a good fight and refusing to be dragged into view. 
As Harry watched, Lockhart gave up and slumped, 
panting, against the white edge of the picture. 

“Will you sign it?” said Colin eagerly. 

“No,” said Harry flatly, glancing around to check that 
the room was really deserted. “Sorry, Colin, I’m in a 
hurry — Quidditch practice — ” 

He climbed through the portrait hole. 

“Oh, wow! Wait for me! I’ve never watched a Quidditch 
game before!” 

Colin scrambled through the hole after him. 

“It’ll be really boring,” Harry said quickly, but Colin 
ignored him, his face shining with excitement. 

“You were the youngest House player in a hundred 
years, weren’t you, Harry? Weren’t you?” said Colin, 
trotting alongside him. “You must be brilliant. I’ve 
never flown. Is it easy? Is that your own broom? Is 
that the best one there is?” 

Harry didn’t know how to get rid of him. It was like 
having an extremely talkative shadow. 

“I don’t really understand Quidditch,” said Colin 
breathlessly. “Is it true there are four balls? And two 
of them fly around trying to knock people off their 
brooms?” 

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes,” said Harry heavily, resigned to explaining the 
complicated rules of Quidditch. “They’re called 
Bludgers. There are two Beaters on each team who 
carry clubs to beat the Bludgers away from their side. 
Fred and George Weasley are the Gryffindor Beaters.” 

“And what are the other balls for?” Colin asked, 
tripping down a couple of steps because he was 
gazing open-mouthed at Harry. 

“Well, the Quaffle — that’s the biggish red one — is 
the one that scores goals. Three Chasers on each 
team throw the Quaffle to each other and try and get 
it through the goal posts at the end of the pitch — 
they’re three long poles with hoops on the end.” 

“And the fourth ball — ” 

“ — is the Golden Snitch,” said Harry, “and it’s very 
small, very fast, and difficult to catch. But that’s what 
the Seeker’s got to do, because a game of Quidditch 
doesn’t end until the Snitch has been caught. And 
whichever team’s Seeker gets the Snitch earns his 
team an extra hundred and fifty points.” 

“And you’re the Gryffindor Seeker, aren’t you?” said 
Colin in awe. 

“Yes,” said Harry as they left the castle and started 
across the dew-drenched grass. “And there’s the 
Keeper, too. He guards the goal posts. That’s it, 
really.” 

But Colin didn’t stop questioning Harry all the way 
down the sloping lawns to the Quidditch field, and 
Harry only shook him off when he reached the 
changing rooms; Colin called after him in a piping 
voice, “I’ll go and get a good seat, Harry!” and hurried 
off to the stands. 

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




The rest of the Gryffindor team were already in the 
changing room. Wood was the only person who looked 
truly awake. Fred and George Weasley were sitting, 
puffy-eyed and tousle-haired, next to fourth year 
Alicia Spinnet, who seemed to be nodding off against 
the wall behind her. Her fellow Chasers, Katie Bell 
and Angelina Johnson, were yawning side by side 
opposite them. 

“There you are, Harry, what kept you?” said Wood 
briskly. “Now, I wanted a quick talk with you all 
before we actually get onto the field, because I spent 
the summer devising a whole new training program, 
which I really think will make all the difference. ...” 

Wood was holding up a large diagram of a Quidditch 
field, on which were drawn many lines, arrows, and 
crosses in different-colored inks. He took out his 
wand, tapped the board, and the arrows began to 
wiggle over the diagram like caterpillars. As Wood 
launched into a speech about his new tactics, Fred 
Weasley’s head drooped right onto Alicia Spinnet’s 
shoulder and he began to snore. 

The first board took nearly twenty minutes to explain, 
but there was another board under that, and a third 
under that one. Harry sank into a stupor as Wood 
droned on and on. 

“So,” said Wood, at long last, jerking Harry from a 
wistful fantasy about what he could be eating for 
breakfast at this very moment up at the castle. “Is 
that clear? Any questions?” 

“I’ve got a question, Oliver,” said George, who had 
woken with a start. “Why couldn’t you have told us all 
this yesterday when we were awake?” 

Wood wasn’t pleased. 

Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Now, listen here, you lot,” he said, glowering at them 
all. “We should have won the Quidditch Cup last year. 
We’re easily the best team. But unfortunately — 
owing to circumstances beyond our control — ” 

Harry shifted guiltily in his seat. He had been 
unconscious in the hospital wing for the final match 
of the previous year, meaning that Gryffindor had 
been a player short and had suffered their worst 
defeat in three hundred years. 

Wood took a moment to regain control of himself. 
Their last defeat was clearly still torturing him. 

“So this year, we train harder than ever before. ... 
Okay, let’s go and put our new theories into practice!” 
Wood shouted, seizing his broomstick and leading the 
way out of the locker rooms. Stiff-legged and still 
yawning, his team followed. 

They had been in the locker room so long that the 
sun was up completely now, although remnants of 
mist hung over the grass in the stadium. As Harry 
walked onto the field, he saw Ron and Hermione 
sitting in the stands. 

“Aren’t you finished yet?” called Ron incredulously. 

“Haven’t even started,” said Harry, looking jealously 
at the toast and marmalade Ron and Hermione had 
brought out of the Great Hall. “Wood’s been teaching 
us new moves.” 

He mounted his broomstick and kicked at the 
ground, soaring up into the air. The cool morning air 
whipped his face, waking him far more effectively 
than Wood’s long talk. It felt wonderful to be back on 
the Quidditch field. He soared right around the 
stadium at full speed, racing Fred and George. 

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“What’s that funny clicking noise?” called Fred as 
they hurtled around the corner. 

Harry looked into the stands. Colin was sitting in one 
of the highest seats, his camera raised, taking picture 
after picture, the sound strangely magnified in the 
deserted stadium. 

“Look this way, Harry! This way!” he cried shrilly. 
“Who’s that?” said Fred. 

“No idea,” Harry lied, putting on a spurt of speed that 
took him as far away as possible from Colin. 

“What’s going on?” said Wood, frowning, as he 
skimmed through the air toward them. “Why’s that 
first year taking pictures? I don’t like it. He could be a 
Slytherin spy, trying to find out about our new 
training program.” 

“He’s in Gryffindor,” said Harry quickly. 

“And the Slytherins don’t need a spy, Oliver,” said 
George. 

“What makes you say that?” said Wood testily. 

“Because they’re here in person,” said George, 
pointing. 

Several people in green robes were walking onto the 
field, broomsticks in their hands. 

“I don’t believe it!” Wood hissed in outrage. “I booked 
the field for today! We’ll see about this!” 



Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Wood shot toward the ground, landing rather harder 
than he meant to in his anger, staggering slightly as 
he dismounted. Harry, Fred, and George followed. 

“Flint!” Wood bellowed at the Slytherin Captain. “This 
is our practice time! We got up specially! You can 
clear off now!” 

Marcus Flint was even larger than Wood. He had a 
look of trollish cunning on his face as he replied, 
“Plenty of room for all of us, Wood.” 

Angelina, Alicia, and Katie had come over, too. There 
were no girls on the Slytherin team, who stood 
shoulder to shoulder, facing the Gryffindors, leering 
to a man. 

“But I booked the field!” said Wood, positively spitting 
with rage. “I booked it!” 

“Ah,” said Flint. “But Tve got a specially signed note 
here from Professor Snape. % Professor S. Snape, give 
the Slytherin team permission to practice today on the 
Quidditch field owinq to the need to train their new 
Seeker. ’ ” 

“You’ve got a new Seeker?” said Wood, distracted. 
“Where?” 

And from behind the six large figures before them 
came a seventh, smaller boy, smirking all over his 
pale, pointed face. It was Draco Malfoy. 

“Aren’t you Lucius Malfoy’s son?” said Fred, looking 
at Malfoy with dislike. 

“Funny you should mention Draco’s father,” said Flint 
as the whole Slytherin team smiled still more broadly. 



Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Let me show you the generous gift he’s made to the 
Slytherin team.” 

All seven of them held out their broomsticks. Seven 
highly polished, brand-new handles and seven sets of 
fine gold lettering spelling the words Nimbus Two 
Thousand and One gleamed under the Gryffindors’ 
noses in the early morning sun. 

“Very latest model. Only came out last month,” said 
Flint carelessly, flicking a speck of dust from the end 
of his own. “I believe it outstrips the old Two 
Thousand series by a considerable amount. As for the 
old Cleansweeps” — he smiled nastily at Fred and 
George, who were both clutching Cleansweep Fives — 
“sweeps the board with them.” 

None of the Gryffindor team could think of anything 
to say for a moment. Malfoy was smirking so broadly 
his cold eyes were reduced to slits. 

“Oh, look,” said Flint. “A field invasion.” 

Ron and Hermione were crossing the grass to see 
what was going on. 

“What’s happening?” Ron asked Harry. “Why aren’t 
you playing? And what’s he doing here?” 

He was looking at Malfoy, taking in his Slytherin 
Quidditch robes. 

“I’m the new Slytherin Seeker, Weasley,” said Malfoy, 
smugly. “Everyone’s just been admiring the brooms 
my father’s bought our team.” 

Ron gaped, openmouthed, at the seven superb 
broomsticks in front of him. 



Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Good, aren’t they?” said Malfoy smoothly. “But 
perhaps the Gryffindor team will be able to raise some 
gold and get new brooms, too. You could raffle off 
those Cleansweep Fives; I expect a museum would 
bid for them.” 

The Slytherin team howled with laughter. 

“At least no one on the Gryffindor team had to buy 
their way in,” said Hermione sharply. “They got in on 
pure talent.” 

The smug look on Malfoy’s face flickered. 

“No one asked your opinion, you filthy little 
Mudblood,” he spat. 

Harry knew at once that Malfoy had said something 
really bad because there was an instant uproar at his 
words. Flint had to dive in front of Malfoy to stop Fred 
and George jumping on him, Alicia shrieked, “How 
dare you\”, and Ron plunged his hand into his robes, 
pulled out his wand, yelling, “You’ll pay for that one, 
Malfoy!” and pointed it furiously under Flint’s arm at 
Malfoy’s face. 

A loud bang echoed around the stadium and a jet of 
green light shot out of the wrong end of Ron’s wand, 
hitting him in the stomach and sending him reeling 
backward onto the grass. 

“Ron! Ron! Are you all right?” squealed Hermione. 

Ron opened his mouth to speak, but no words came 
out. Instead he gave an almighty belch and several 
slugs dribbled out of his mouth onto his lap. 

The Slytherin team were paralyzed with laughter. 

Flint was doubled up, hanging onto his new 

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




broomstick for support. Malfoy was on all fours, 
banging the ground with his fist. The Gryffindors were 
gathered around Ron, who kept belching large, 
glistening slugs. Nobody seemed to want to touch 
him. 

“We’d better get him to Hagrid’s, it’s nearest,” said 
Harry to Hermione, who nodded bravely, and the pair 
of them pulled Ron up by the arms. 

“What happened, Harry? What happened? Is he ill? 
But you can cure him, can’t you?” Colin had run 
down from his seat and was now dancing alongside 
them as they left the field. Ron gave a huge heave and 
more slugs dribbled down his front. 

“Oooh,” said Colin, fascinated and raising his camera. 
“Can you hold him still, Harry?” 

“Get out of the way, Colin!” said Harry angrily. He and 
Hermione supported Ron out of the stadium and 
across the grounds toward the edge of the forest. 

“Nearly there, Ron,” said Hermione as the 
gamekeeper’s cabin came into view. “You’ll be all right 
in a minute — almost there — ” 

They were within twenty feet of Hagrid’s house when 
the front door opened, but it wasn’t Hagrid who 
emerged. Gilderoy Lockhart, wearing robes of palest 
mauve today, came striding out. 

“Quick, behind here,” Harry hissed, dragging Ron 
behind a nearby bush. Hermione followed, somewhat 
reluctantly. 

“It’s a simple matter if you know what you’re doing!” 
Lockhart was saying loudly to Hagrid. “If you need 
help, you know where I am! I’ll let you have a copy of 

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




my book. I’m surprised you haven’t already got one — 
I’ll sign one tonight and send it over. Well, good-bye!” 
And he strode away toward the castle. 

Harry waited until Lockhart was out of sight, then 
pulled Ron out of the bush and up to Hagrid’s front 
door. They knocked urgently. 

Hagrid appeared at once, looking very grumpy, but 
his expression brightened when he saw who it was. 

“Bin wonderin’ when you’d come ter see me — come 
in, come in — thought you mighta bin Professor 
Lockhart back again — ” 

Harry and Hermione supported Ron over the 
threshold into the one-roomed cabin, which had an 
enormous bed in one corner, a fire crackling merrily 
in the other. Hagrid didn’t seem perturbed by Ron’s 
slug problem, which Harry hastily explained as he 
lowered Ron into a chair. 

“Better out than in,” he said cheerfully, plunking a 
large copper basin in front of him. “Get ’em all up, 
Ron.” 

“I don’t think there’s anything to do except wait for it 
to stop,” said Hermione anxiously, watching Ron bend 
over the basin. “That’s a difficult curse to work at the 
best of times, but with a broken wand — ” 

Hagrid was bustling around making them tea. His 
boarhound, Fang, was slobbering over Harry. 

“What did Lockhart want with you, Hagrid?” Harry 
asked, scratching Fang’s ears. 

“Givin’ me advice on gettin’ kelpies out of a well,” 
growled Hagrid, moving a half-plucked rooster off his 

Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




scrubbed table and setting down the teapot. “Like I 
don’ know. An’ bangin’ on about some banshee he 
banished. If one word of it was true, I’ll eat my kettle.” 

It was most unlike Hagrid to criticize a Hogwarts 
teacher, and Harry looked at him in surprise. 
Hermione, however, said in a voice somewhat higher 
than usual, “I think you’re being a bit unfair. 

Professor Dumbledore obviously thought he was the 
best man for the job — ” 

“He was the on’y man for the job,” said Hagrid, 
offering them a plate of treacle toffee, while Ron 
coughed squelchily into his basin. “An’ I mean the 
on’y one. Gettin’ very difficult ter find anyone fer the 
Dark Arts job. People aren’t too keen ter take it on, 
see. They’re startin’ ter think it’s jinxed. No one’s 
lasted long fer a while now. So tell me,” said Hagrid, 
jerking his head at Ron. “Who was he tryin’ ter 
curse?” 

“Malfoy called Hermione something — it must’ve been 
really bad, because everyone went wild.” 

“It was bad,” said Ron hoarsely, emerging over the 
tabletop looking pale and sweaty. “Malfoy called her 
‘Mudblood,’ Hagrid — ” 

Ron dived out of sight again as a fresh wave of slugs 
made their appearance. Hagrid looked outraged. 

“He didn’!” he growled at Hermione. 

“He did,” she said. “But I don’t know what it means. I 
could tell it was really rude, of course — ” 

“It’s about the most insulting thing he could think of,” 
gasped Ron, coming back up. “Mudblood’s a really 
foul name for someone who is Muggle-born — you 

Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




know, non-magic parents. There are some wizards — 
like Malfoy’s family — who think they’re better than 
everyone else because they’re what people call pure- 
blood.” He gave a small burp, and a single slug fell 
into his outstretched hand. He threw it into the basin 
and continued, “I mean, the rest of us know it doesn’t 
make any difference at all. Look at Neville Longbottom 
— he’s pure-blood and he can hardly stand a 
cauldron the right way up.” 

“An’ they haven’t invented a spell our Hermione can’ 
do,” said Hagrid proudly, making Hermione go a 
brilliant shade of magenta. 

“It’s a disgusting thing to call someone,” said Ron, 
wiping his sweaty brow with a shaking hand. “Dirty 
blood, see. Common blood. It’s ridiculous. Most 
wizards these days are half-blood anyway. If we 
hadn’t married Muggles we’d’ve died out.” 

He retched and ducked out of sight again. 

“Well, I don’ blame yeh fer tryin’ ter curse him, Ron,” 
said Hagrid loudly over the thuds of more slugs 
hitting the basin. “Bu’ maybe it was a good thing yer 
wand backfired. ’Spect Lucius Malfoy would’ve come 
marchin’ up ter school if yeh’d cursed his son. Least 
yer not in trouble.” 

Harry would have pointed out that trouble didn’t 
come much worse than having slugs pouring out of 
your mouth, but he couldn’t; Hagrid’s treacle toffee 
had cemented his jaws together. 

“Harry,” said Hagrid abruptly as though struck by a 
sudden thought. “Gotta bone ter pick with yeh. I’ve 
heard you’ve bin givin’ out signed photos. How come I 
haven’t got one?” 



Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Furious, Harry wrenched his teeth apart. 

“I have not been giving out signed photos,” he said 
hotly. “If Lockhart’s still spreading that around — ” 

But then he saw that Hagrid was laughing. 

“I’m on’y jokin’,” he said, patting Harry genially on the 
back and sending him face first into the table. “I knew 
yeh hadn’t really. I told Lockhart yeh didn’ need teh. 
Yer more famous than him without tryin’.” 

“Bet he didn’t like that,” said Harry, sitting up and 
rubbing his chin. 

“Don’ think he did,” said Hagrid, his eyes twinkling. 
“An’ then I told him I’d never read one o’ his books an’ 
he decided ter go. Treacle toffee, Ron?” he added as 
Ron reappeared. 

“No thanks,” said Ron weakly. “Better not risk it.” 

“Come an’ see what I’ve bin growin’,” said Hagrid as 
Harry and Hermione finished the last of their tea. 

In the small vegetable patch behind Hagrid ’s house 
were a dozen of the largest pumpkins Harry had ever 
seen. Each was the size of a large boulder. 

“Gettin’ on well, aren’t they?” said Hagrid happily. 

“Fer the Halloween feast ... should be big enough by 
then.” 

“What’ve you been feeding them?” said Harry. 

Hagrid looked over his shoulder to check that they 
were alone. 



Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, I’ve bin givin’ them — you know — a bit o’ help 



Harry noticed Hagrid’s flowery pink umbrella leaning 
against the back wall of the cabin. Harry had had 
reason to believe before now that this umbrella was 
not all it looked; in fact, he had the strong impression 
that Hagrid’s old school wand was concealed inside it. 
Hagrid wasn’t supposed to use magic. He had been 
expelled from Hogwarts in his third year, but Harry 
had never found out why — any mention of the 
matter and Hagrid would clear his throat loudly and 
become mysteriously deaf until the subject was 
changed. 

“An Engorgement Charm, I suppose?” said Hermione, 
halfway between disapproval and amusement. “Well, 
you’ve done a good job on them.” 

“That’s what yer little sister said,” said Hagrid, 
nodding at Ron. “Met her jus’ yesterday.” Hagrid 
looked sideways at Harry, his beard twitching. “Said 
she was jus’ lookin’ round the grounds, but I reckon 
she was hopin’ she might run inter someone else at 
my house.” He winked at Harry. “If yeh ask me, she 
wouldn’ say no ter a signed — ” 

“Oh, shut up,” said Harry. Ron snorted with laughter 
and the ground was sprayed with slugs. 

“Watch it!” Hagrid roared, pulling Ron away from his 
precious pumpkins. 

It was nearly lunchtime and as Harry had only had 
one bit of treacle toffee since dawn, he was keen to go 
back to school to eat. They said good-bye to Hagrid 
and walked back up to the castle, Ron hiccoughing 
occasionally, but only bringing up two very small 
slugs. 

Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




They had barely set foot in the cool entrance hall 
when a voice rang out, “There you are, Potter — 
Weasley.” Professor McGonagall was walking toward 
them, looking stern. “You will both do your detentions 
this evening.” 

“What’re we doing, Professor?” said Ron, nervously 
suppressing a burp. 

“ You will be polishing the silver in the trophy room 
with Mr. Filch,” said Professor McGonagall. “And no 
magic, Weasley — elbow grease.” 

Ron gulped. Argus Filch, the caretaker, was loathed 
by every student in the school. 

“And you, Potter, will be helping Professor Lockhart 
answer his fan mail,” said Professor McGonagall. 

“Oh n — Professor, can’t I go and do the trophy room, 
too?” said Harry desperately. 

“Certainly not,” said Professor McGonagall, raising 
her eyebrows. “Professor Lockhart requested you 
particularly. Eight o’clock sharp, both of you.” 

Harry and Ron slouched into the Great Hall in states 
of deepest gloom, Hermione behind them, wearing a 
well-you-did-break-school-rules sort of expression. 
Harry didn’t enjoy his shepherd’s pie as much as he’d 
thought. Both he and Ron felt they’d got the worse 
deal. 

“Filch ’ll have me there all night,” said Ron heavily. 

“No magic! There must be about a hundred cups in 
that room. I’m no good at Muggle cleaning.” 



Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I’d swap anytime,” said Harry hollowly. “I’ve had 
loads of practice with the Dursleys. Answering 
Lockhart’s fan mail ... he’ll be a nightmare. ...” 

Saturday afternoon seemed to melt away, and in what 
seemed like no time, it was five minutes to eight, and 
Harry was dragging his feet along the second-floor 
corridor to Lockhart’s office. He gritted his teeth and 
knocked. 

The door flew open at once. Lockhart beamed down at 
him. 

“Ah, here’s the scalawag!” he said. “Come in, Harry, 
come in — ” 

Shining brightly on the walls by the light of many 
candles were countless framed photographs of 
Lockhart. He had even signed a few of them. Another 
large pile lay on his desk. 

“You can address the envelopes!” Lockhart told Harry, 
as though this was a huge treat. “This first one’s to 
Gladys Gudgeon, bless her — huge fan of mine — ” 

The minutes snailed by. Harry let Lockhart’s voice 
wash over him, occasionally saying, “Mmm” and 
“Right” and “Yeah.” Now and then he caught a phrase 
like, “Fame’s a fickle friend, Harry,” or “Celebrity is as 
celebrity does, remember that.” 

The candles burned lower and lower, making the light 
dance over the many moving faces of Lockhart 
watching him. Harry moved his aching hand over 
what felt like the thousandth envelope, writing out 
Veronica Smethley’s address. It must be nearly time to 
leave, Harry thought miserably, please let it be nearly 
time. ... 



Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




And then he heard something — something quite 
apart from the spitting of the dying candles and 
Lockhart’s prattle about his fans. 

It was a voice, a voice to chill the bone marrow, a 
voice of breathtaking, ice-cold venom. 

“Come ... come to me. ... Let me rip you. ... Let me tear 
you. ... Let me kill you. ...” 

Harry gave a huge jump and a large lilac blot 
appeared on Veronica Smethley’s street. 

“What?” he said loudly. 

“I know!” said Lockhart. “Six solid months at the top 
of the best-seller list! Broke all records!” 

“No,” said Harry frantically. “That voice!” 

“Sorry?” said Lockhart, looking puzzled. “What voice?” 

“That — that voice that said — didn’t you hear it?” 

Lockhart was looking at Harry in high astonishment. 

“What are you talking about, Harry? Perhaps you’re 
getting a little drowsy? Great Scott — look at the time! 
“We’ve been here nearly four hours! I’d never have 
believed it — the time’s flown, hasn’t it?” 

Harry didn’t answer. He was straining his ears to hear 
the voice again, but there was no sound now except 
for Lockhart telling him he mustn’t expect a treat like 
this every time he got detention. Feeling dazed, Harry 
left. 

It was so late that the Gryffindor common room was 
almost empty. Harry went straight up to the 

Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




dormitory. Ron wasn’t back yet. Harry pulled on his 
pajamas, got into bed, and waited. Half an hour later, 
Ron arrived, nursing his right arm and bringing a 
strong smell of polish into the darkened room. 

“My muscles have all seized up,” he groaned, sinking 
on his bed. “Fourteen times he made me buff up that 
Quidditch Cup before he was satisfied. And then I 
had another slug attack all over a Special Award for 
Services to the School. Took ages to get the slime off. 

. . . How was it with Lockhart?” 

Keeping his voice low so as not to wake Neville, Dean, 
and Seamus, Harry told Ron exactly what he had 
heard. 

“And Lockhart said he couldn’t hear it?” said Ron. 
Harry could see him frowning in the moonlight. 

“D’you think he was lying? But I don’t get it — even 
someone invisible would’ve had to open the door.” 

“I know,” said Harry, lying back in his four-poster and 
staring at the canopy above him. “I don’t get it either.” 



Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




d 




THE DEATHDAY PARTY 

October arrived, spreading a damp chill over the 
grounds and into the castle. Madam Pomfrey, the 
nurse, was kept busy by a sudden spate of colds 
among the staff and students. Her Pepperup Potion 
worked instantly, though it left the drinker smoking 
at the ears for several hours afterward. Ginny 
Weasley, who had been looking pale, was bullied into 
taking some by Percy. The steam pouring from under 
her vivid hair gave the impression that her whole 
head was on fire. 

Raindrops the size of bullets thundered on the castle 
windows for days on end; the lake rose, the flower 
beds turned into muddy streams, and Hagrid’s 
pumpkins swelled to the size of garden sheds. Oliver 
Wood’s enthusiasm for regular training sessions, 
however, was not dampened, which was why Harry 
was to be found, late one stormy Saturday afternoon 
a few days before Halloween, returning to Gryffindor 
Tower, drenched to the skin and splattered with mud. 
Even aside from the rain and wind it hadn’t been a 
happy practice session. Fred and George, who had 
Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



been spying on the Slytherin team, had seen for 
themselves the speed of those new Nimbus Two 
Thousand and Ones. They reported that the Slytherin 
team was no more than seven greenish blurs, 
shooting through the air like missiles. 

As Harry squelched along the deserted corridor he 
came across somebody who looked just as 
preoccupied as he was. Nearly Headless Nick, the 
ghost of Gryffindor Tower, was staring morosely out of 
a window, muttering under his breath, "... don’t fulfill 
their requirements ... half an inch, if that ...” 

“Hello, Nick,” said Harry. 

“Hello, hello,” said Nearly Headless Nick, starting and 
looking round. He wore a dashing, plumed hat on his 
long curly hair, and a tunic with a ruff, which 
concealed the fact that his neck was almost 
completely severed. He was pale as smoke, and Harry 
could see right through him to the dark sky and 
torrential rain outside. 

“You look troubled, young Potter,” said Nick, folding a 
transparent letter as he spoke and tucking it inside 
his doublet. 

“So do you,” said Harry. 

“Ah,” Nearly Headless Nick waved an elegant hand, “a 
matter of no importance. ... It’s not as though I really 
wanted to join. ... Thought I’d apply, but apparently I 
‘don’t fulfill requirements’ — ” 

In spite of his airy tone, there was a look of great 
bitterness on his face. 

“But you would think, wouldn’t you,” he erupted 
suddenly, pulling the letter back out of his pocket, 

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“that getting hit forty-five times in the neck with a 
blunt axe would qualify you to join the Headless 
Hunt?” 

“Oh — yes,” said Harry, who was obviously supposed 
to agree. 

“I mean, nobody wishes more than I do that it had all 
been quick and clean, and my head had come off 
properly, I mean, it would have saved me a great deal 
of pain and ridicule. However — ” Nearly Headless 
Nick shook his letter open and read furiously: 

“ ‘We can only accept huntsmen whose heads have 
parted company with their bodies. You will appreciate 
that it would be impossible otherwise for members to 
participate in hunt activities such as Horseback Head- 
Juggling and Head Polo. It is with the greatest regret, 
therefore, that I must inform you that you do not fulfill 
our requirements. With very best wishes, Sir Patrick 
Delaney -Podmore.’ ” 

Fuming, Nearly Headless Nick stuffed the letter away. 

“Half an inch of skin and sinew holding my neck on, 
Harry! Most people would think that’s good and 
beheaded, but oh, no, it’s not enough for Sir Properly 
Decapitated-Podmore . ” 

Nearly Headless Nick took several deep breaths and 
then said, in a far calmer tone, “So — what’s 
bothering you? Anything I can do?” 

“No,” said Harry. “Not unless you know where we can 
get seven free Nimbus Two Thousand and Ones for 
our match against Sly — ” 

The rest of Harry’s sentence was drowned out by a 
high-pitched mewling from somewhere near his 

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




ankles. He looked down and found himself gazing into 
a pair of lamp-like yellow eyes. It was Mrs. Norris, the 
skeletal gray cat who was used by the caretaker, 

Argus Filch, as a sort of deputy in his endless battle 
against students. 

“You’d better get out of here, Harry,” said Nick 
quickly. “Filch isn’t in a good mood — he’s got the flu 
and some third years accidentally plastered frog 
brains all over the ceiling in dungeon five. He’s been 
cleaning all morning, and if he sees you dripping mud 
all over the place — ” 

“Right,” said Harry, backing away from the accusing 
stare of Mrs. Norris, but not quickly enough. Drawn 
to the spot by the mysterious power that seemed to 
connect him with his foul cat, Argus Filch burst 
suddenly through a tapestry to Harry’s right, 
wheezing and looking wildly about for the rule- 
breaker. There was a thick tartan scarf bound around 
his head, and his nose was unusually purple. 

“Filth!” he shouted, his jowls aquiver, his eyes 
popping alarmingly as he pointed at the muddy 
puddle that had dripped from Harry’s Quidditch 
robes. “Mess and muck everywhere! I’ve had enough 
of it, I tell you! Follow me, Potter!” 

So Harry waved a gloomy good-bye to Nearly Headless 
Nick and followed Filch back downstairs, doubling the 
number of muddy footprints on the floor. 

Harry had never been inside Filch’s office before; it 
was a place most students avoided. The room was 
dingy and windowless, lit by a single oil lamp 
dangling from the low ceiling. A faint smell of fried 
fish lingered about the place. Wooden filing cabinets 
stood around the walls; from their labels, Harry could 
see that they contained details of every pupil Filch 
Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




had ever punished. Fred and George Weasley had an 
entire drawer to themselves. A highly polished 
collection of chains and manacles hung on the wall 
behind Filch’s desk. It was common knowledge that 
he was always begging Dumbledore to let him 
suspend students by their ankles from the ceiling. 

Filch grabbed a quill from a pot on his desk and 
began shuffling around looking for parchment. 

“Dung,” he muttered furiously, “great sizzling dragon 
bogies ... frog brains ... rat intestines ... I’ve had 
enough of it ... make an example ... where’s the form 
... yes ...” 

He retrieved a large roll of parchment from his desk 
drawer and stretched it out in front of him, dipping 
his long black quill into the ink pot. 

“ Name ... Harry Potter. Crime ...” 

“It was only a bit of mud!” said Harry. 

“It’s only a bit of mud to you, boy, but to me it’s an 
extra hour scrubbing!” shouted Filch, a drip shivering 
unpleasantly at the end of his bulbous nose. “Crime 
... befouling the castle ... suggested sentence ...” 

Dabbing at his streaming nose, Filch squinted 
unpleasantly at Harry, who waited with bated breath 
for his sentence to fall. 

But as Filch lowered his quill, there was a great 
BANG! on the ceiling of the office, which made the oil 
lamp rattle. 

“PEEVES!” Filch roared, flinging down his quill in a 
transport of rage. “I’ll have you this time, I’ll have 
you!” 

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets- J.K. Rowling 




And without a backward glance at Harry, Filch ran 
flat-footed from the office, Mrs. Norris streaking 
alongside him. 

Peeves was the school poltergeist, a grinning, airborne 
menace who lived to cause havoc and distress. Harry 
didn’t much like Peeves, but couldn’t help feeling 
grateful for his timing. Hopefully, whatever Peeves 
had done (and it sounded as though he’d wrecked 
something very big this time) would distract Filch 
from Harry. 

Thinking that he should probably wait for Filch to 
come back, Harry sank into a moth-eaten chair next 
to the desk. There was only one thing on it apart from 
his half-completed form: a large, glossy, purple 
envelope with silver lettering on the front. With a 
quick glance at the door to check that Filch wasn’t on 
his way back, Harry picked up the envelope and read: 

KWIKSPELL 

A Correspondence Course in Beginners’ Magic 

Intrigued, Harry flicked the envelope open and pulled 
out the sheaf of parchment inside. More curly silver 
writing on the front page said: 

Feel out of step in the world of modern magic? Find 
yourself making excuses not to perform simple spells? 
Ever been taunted for your woeful wandwork? 

There is an answer! 

Kwikspell is an all-new, fail-safe, quick-result, easy- 
learn course. Hundreds of witches and wizards have 
benefited from the Kwikspell method! 



Madam Z. Nettles of Topsham writes: 

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I had no memory for incantations and my potions 
were a family joke! Now, after a Kwikspell course, I am 
the center of attention at parties and friends beg for the 
recipe of my Scintillation Solution!” 

Warlock D. J. Prod of Didsbury says: 

“My wife used to sneer at my feeble charms, but one 
month into your fabulous Kwikspell course and I 
succeeded in turning her into a yak! 

Thank you, Kwikspell!” 

Fascinated, Harry thumbed through the rest of the 
envelope’s contents. Why on earth did Filch want a 
Kwikspell course? Did this mean he wasn’t a proper 
wizard? Harry was just reading “Lesson One: Holding 
Your Wand (Some Useful Tips)” when shuffling 
footsteps outside told him Filch was coming back. 
Stuffing the parchment back into the envelope, Harry 
threw it back onto the desk just as the door opened. 

Filch was looking triumphant. 

“That vanishing cabinet was extremely valuable!” he 
was saying gleefully to Mrs. Norris. “We’ll have Peeves 
out this time, my sweet — ” 

His eyes fell on Harry and then darted to the 
Kwikspell envelope, which, Harry realized too late, 
was lying two feet away from where it had started. 

Filch ’s pasty face went brick red. Harry braced 
himself for a tidal wave of fury. Filch hobbled across 
to his desk, snatched up the envelope, and threw it 
into a drawer. 

“Have you — did you read — ?” he sputtered. 



Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” Harry lied quickly. 

Filch ’s knobbly hands were twisting together. 

“If I thought you’d read my private — not that it’s 
mine — for a friend — be that as it may — however — 



Harry was staring at him, alarmed; Filch had never 
looked madder. His eyes were popping, a tic was 
going in one of his pouchy cheeks, and the tartan 
scarf didn’t help. 

“Very well — go — and don’t breathe a word — not 
that — however, if you didn’t read — go now, I have to 
write up Peeves’ report — go — ” 

Amazed at his luck, Harry sped out of the office, up 
the corridor, and back upstairs. To escape from 
Filch ’s office without punishment was probably some 
kind of school record. 

“Harry! Harry! Did it work?” 

Nearly Headless Nick came gliding out of a classroom. 
Behind him, Harry could see the wreckage of a large 
black-and-gold cabinet that appeared to have been 
dropped from a great height. 

“I persuaded Peeves to crash it right over Filch’s 
office,” said Nick eagerly. “Thought it might distract 
him — ” 



“Was that you?” said Harry gratefully. “Yeah, it 
worked, I didn’t even get detention. Thanks, Nick!” 

They set off up the corridor together. Nearly Headless 
Nick, Harry noticed, was still holding Sir Patrick’s 
rejection letter. 

Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I wish there was something I could do for you about 
the Headless Hunt,” Harry said. 



Nearly Headless Nick stopped in his tracks and Harry 
walked right through him. He wished he hadn’t; it 
was like stepping through an icy shower. 

“But there is something you could do for me,” said 
Nick excitedly. “Harry — would I be asking too much 
— but no, you wouldn’t want — ” 

“What is it?” said Harry. 

“Well, this Halloween will be my five hundredth 
deathday,” said Nearly Headless Nick, drawing 
himself up and looking dignified. 

“Oh,” said Harry, not sure whether he should look 
sorry or happy about this. “Right.” 

“I’m holding a party down in one of the roomier 
dungeons. Friends will be coming from all over the 
country. It would be such an honor if you would 
attend. Mr. Weasley and Miss Granger would be most 
welcome, too, of course — but I daresay you’d rather 
go to the school feast?” He watched Harry on 
tenterhooks. 

“No,” said Harry quickly, “I’ll come — ” 

“My dear boy! Harry Potter, at my deathday party! 
And” — he hesitated, looking excited — “do you think 
you could possibly mention to Sir Patrick how very 
frightening and impressive you find me?” 

“Of — of course,” said Harry. 

Nearly Headless Nick beamed at him. 



Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“A deathday party?” said Hermione keenly when 
Harry had changed at last and joined her and Ron in 
the common room. “I bet there aren’t many living 
people who can say they’ve been to one of those — it’ll 
be fascinating!” 

“Why would anyone want to celebrate the day they 
died?” said Ron, who was halfway through his Potions 
homework and grumpy. “Sounds dead depressing to 
me....” 

Rain was still lashing the windows, which were now 
inky black, but inside all looked bright and cheerful. 
The firelight glowed over the countless squashy 
armchairs where people sat reading, talking, doing 
homework or, in the case of Fred and George Weasley, 
trying to find out what would happen if you fed a 
Filibuster firework to a salamander. Fred had 
“rescued” the brilliant orange, fire-dwelling lizard 
from a Care of Magical Creatures class and it was 
now smoldering gently on a table surrounded by a 
knot of curious people. 

Harry was at the point of telling Ron and Hermione 
about Filch and the Kwikspell course when the 
salamander suddenly whizzed into the air, emitting 
loud sparks and bangs as it whirled wildly round the 
room. The sight of Percy bellowing himself hoarse at 
Fred and George, the spectacular display of tangerine 
stars showering from the salamander’s mouth, and its 
escape into the fire, with accompanying explosions, 
drove both Filch and the Kwikspell envelope from 
Harry’s mind. 

By the time Halloween arrived, Harry was regretting 
his rash promise to go to the deathday party. The rest 
of the school was happily anticipating their Halloween 
feast; the Great Hall had been decorated with the 
usual live bats, Hagrid’s vast pumpkins had been 
Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




carved into lanterns large enough for three men to sit 
in, and there were rumors that Dumbledore had 
booked a troupe of dancing skeletons for the 
entertainment. 

“A promise is a promise,” Hermione reminded Harry 
bossily. “You said you’d go to the deathday party.” 

So at seven o’clock, Harry, Ron, and Hermione walked 
straight past the doorway to the packed Great Hall, 
which was glittering invitingly with gold plates and 
candles, and directed their steps instead toward the 
dungeons. 

The passageway leading to Nearly Headless Nick’s 
party had been lined with candles, too, though the 
effect was far from cheerful: These were long, thin, 
jet-black tapers, all burning bright blue, casting a 
dim, ghostly light even over their own living faces. The 
temperature dropped with every step they took. As 
Harry shivered and drew his robes tightly around 
him, he heard what sounded like a thousand 
fingernails scraping an enormous blackboard. 

“Is that supposed to be music?” Ron whispered. They 
turned a corner and saw Nearly Headless Nick 
standing at a doorway hung with black velvet drapes. 

“My dear friends,” he said mournfully. “Welcome, 
welcome ... so pleased you could come. ...” 

He swept off his plumed hat and bowed them inside. 

It was an incredible sight. The dungeon was full of 
hundreds of pearly-white, translucent people, mostly 
drifting around a crowded dance floor, waltzing to the 
dreadful, quavering sound of thirty musical saws, 
played by an orchestra on a raised, black-draped 
platform. A chandelier overhead blazed midnight-blue 
Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




with a thousand more black candles. Their breath 
rose in a mist before them; it was like stepping into a 
freezer. 

“Shall we have a look around?” Harry suggested, 
wanting to warm up his feet. 

“Careful not to walk through anyone,” said Ron 
nervously, and they set off around the edge of the 
dance floor. They passed a group of gloomy nuns, a 
ragged man wearing chains, and the Fat Friar, a 
cheerful Hufflepuff ghost, who was talking to a knight 
with an arrow sticking out of his forehead. Harry 
wasn’t surprised to see that the Bloody Baron, a 
gaunt, staring Slytherin ghost covered in silver 
bloodstains, was being given a wide berth by the 
other ghosts. 

“Oh, no,” said Hermione, stopping abruptly. “Turn 
back, turn back, I don’t want to talk to Moaning 
Myrtle — ” 

“Who?” said Harry as they backtracked quickly. 

“She haunts one of the toilets in the girls’ bathroom 
on the first floor,” said Hermione. 

“She haunts a toilet ?” 

“Yes. It’s been out-of-order all year because she keeps 
having tantrums and flooding the place. I never went 
in there anyway if I could avoid it; it’s awful trying to 
have a pee with her wailing at you — ” 

“Look, food!” said Ron. 

On the other side of the dungeon was a long table, 
also covered in black velvet. They approached it 
eagerly but next moment had stopped in their tracks, 

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




horrified. The smell was quite disgusting. Large, 
rotten fish were laid on handsome silver platters; 
cakes, burned charcoal-black, were heaped on 
salvers; there was a great maggoty haggis, a slab of 
cheese covered in furry green mold and, in pride of 
place, an enormous gray cake in the shape of a 
tombstone, with tar-like icing forming the words, 

SIR NICHOLAS DE MIMSY-PORPINGTON 
DIED 3 1 ST OCTOBER, 1 492 

Harry watched, amazed, as a portly ghost approached 
the table, crouched low, and walked through it, his 
mouth held wide so that it passed through one of the 
stinking salmon. 

“Can you taste it if you walk through it?” Harry asked 
him. 

“Almost,” said the ghost sadly, and he drifted away. 

“I expect they’ve let it rot to give it a stronger flavor,” 
said Hermione knowledgeably, pinching her nose and 
leaning closer to look at the putrid haggis. 

“Can we move? I feel sick,” said Ron. 

They had barely turned around, however, when a 
little man swooped suddenly from under the table and 
came to a halt in midair before them. 

“Hello, Peeves,” said Harry cautiously. 

Unlike the ghosts around them, Peeves the Poltergeist 
was the very reverse of pale and transparent. He was 
wearing a bright orange party hat, a revolving bow tie, 
and a broad grin on his wide, wicked face. 



Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Nibbles?” he said sweetly, offering them a bowl of 
peanuts covered in fungus. 

“No thanks,” said Hermione. 

“Heard you talking about poor Myrtle,” said Peeves, 
his eyes dancing. “Rude you was about poor Myrtle.” 
He took a deep breath and bellowed, “OY! MYRTLE!” 

“Oh, no, Peeves, don’t tell her what I said, she’ll be 
really upset,” Hermione whispered frantically. “I didn’t 
mean it, I don’t mind her — er, hello, Myrtle.” 

The squat ghost of a girl had glided over. She had the 
glummest face Harry had ever seen, half-hidden 
behind lank hair and thick, pearly spectacles. 

“What?” she said sulkily. 

“How are you, Myrtle?” said Hermione in a falsely 
bright voice. “It’s nice to see you out of the toilet.” 

Myrtle sniffed. 

“Miss Granger was just talking about you — ” said 
Peeves slyly in Myrtle’s ear. 

“Just saying — saying — how nice you look tonight,” 
said Hermione, glaring at Peeves. 

Myrtle eyed Hermione suspiciously. 

“You’re making fun of me,” she said, silver tears 
welling rapidly in her small, see-through eyes. 

“No — honestly — didn’t I just say how nice Myrtle’s 
looking?” said Hermione, nudging Harry and Ron 
painfully in the ribs. 



Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, yeah — ” 



“She did — ” 

“Don’t lie to me,” Myrtle gasped, tears now flooding 
down her face, while Peeves chuckled happily over her 
shoulder. “D’you think I don’t know what people call 
me behind my back? Fat Myrtle! Ugly Myrtle! 
Miserable, moaning, moping Myrtle!” 

“You’ve forgotten pimply,” Peeves hissed in her ear. 

Moaning Myrtle burst into anguished sobs and fled 
from the dungeon. Peeves shot after her, pelting her 
with moldy peanuts, yelling, “Pimply\ Pimplyl” 

“Oh, dear,” said Hermione sadly. 

Nearly Headless Nick now drifted toward them 
through the crowd. 

“Enjoying yourselves?” 

“Oh, yes,” they lied. 

“Not a bad turnout,” said Nearly Headless Nick 
proudly. “The Wailing Widow came all the way up 
from Kent. ... It’s nearly time for my speech, I’d better 
go and warn the orchestra. ...” 

The orchestra, however, stopped playing at that very 
moment. They, and everyone else in the dungeon, fell 
silent, looking around in excitement, as a hunting 
horn sounded. 

“Oh, here we go,” said Nearly Headless Nick bitterly. 

Through the dungeon wall burst a dozen ghost 
horses, each ridden by a headless horseman. The 

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




assembly clapped wildly; Harry started to clap, too, 
but stopped quickly at the sight of Nick’s face. 

The horses galloped into the middle of the dance floor 
and halted, rearing and plunging. At the front of the 
pack was a large ghost who held his bearded head 
under his arm, from which position he was blowing 
the horn. The ghost leapt down, lifted his head high 
in the air so he could see over the crowd (everyone 
laughed), and strode over to Nearly Headless Nick, 
squashing his head back onto his neck. 

“Nick!” he roared. “How are you? Head still hanging in 
there?” 

He gave a hearty guffaw and clapped Nearly Headless 
Nick on the shoulder. 

“Welcome, Patrick,” said Nick stiffly. 

“Live ’uns!” said Sir Patrick, spotting Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione and giving a huge, fake jump of 
astonishment, so that his head fell off again (the 
crowd howled with laughter). 

“Very amusing,” said Nearly Headless Nick darkly. 

“Don’t mind Nick!” shouted Sir Patrick’s head from 
the floor. “Still upset we won’t let him join the Hunt! 
But I mean to say — look at the fellow — ” 

“I think,” said Harry hurriedly, at a meaningful look 
from Nick, “Nick’s very — frightening and — er — ” 

“Ha!” yelled Sir Patrick’s head. “Bet he asked you to 
say that!” 

“If I could have everyone’s attention, it’s time for my 
speech!” said Nearly Headless Nick loudly, striding 

Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




toward the podium and climbing into an icy blue 
spotlight. 

“My late lamented lords, ladies, and gentlemen, it is 
my great sorrow ...” 

But nobody heard much more. Sir Patrick and the 
rest of the Headless Hunt had just started a game of 
Head Hockey and the crowd were turning to watch. 
Nearly Headless Nick tried vainly to recapture his 
audience, but gave up as Sir Patrick’s head went 
sailing past him to loud cheers. 

Harry was very cold by now, not to mention hungry. 

“I can’t stand much more of this,” Ron muttered, his 
teeth chattering, as the orchestra ground back into 
action and the ghosts swept back onto the dance 
floor. 

“Let’s go,” Harry agreed. 

They backed toward the door, nodding and beaming 
at anyone who looked at them, and a minute later 
were hurrying back up the passageway full of black 
candles. 

“Pudding might not be finished yet,” said Ron 
hopefully, leading the way toward the steps to the 
entrance hall. 

And then Harry heard it. 

"... rip ... tear ... kill ...” 

It was the same voice, the same cold, murderous 
voice he had heard in Lockhart’s office. 



Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




He stumbled to a halt, clutching at the stone wall, 
listening with all his might, looking around, squinting 
up and down the dimly lit passageway. 

“Harry, what’re you — ?” 

“It’s that voice again — shut up a minute — ” 

soo hungry ... for so long ...” 

“Listen!” said Harry urgently, and Ron and Hermione 
froze, watching him. 

“... kill ... time to kill ...” 

The voice was growing fainter. Harry was sure it was 
moving away — moving upward. A mixture of fear and 
excitement gripped him as he stared at the dark 
ceiling; how could it be moving upward? Was it a 
phantom, to whom stone ceilings didn’t matter? 

“This way,” he shouted, and he began to run, up the 
stairs, into the entrance hall. It was no good hoping to 
hear anything here, the babble of talk from the 
Halloween feast was echoing out of the Great Hall. 
Harry sprinted up the marble staircase to the first 
floor, Ron and Hermione clattering behind him. 

“Harry, what’re we — ” 

“SHH!” 

Harry strained his ears. Distantly, from the floor 
above, and growing fainter still, he heard the voice: 
“...I smell blood. ...I SMELL BLOOD\” 

His stomach lurched — 



Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s going to kill someone!” he shouted, and ignoring 
Ron’s and Hermione’s bewildered faces, he ran up the 
next flight of steps three at a time, trying to listen 
over his own pounding footsteps — 

Harry hurtled around the whole of the second floor, 
Ron and Hermione panting behind him, not stopping 
until they turned a corner into the last, deserted 
passage. 

“Harry, what was that all about?” said Ron, wiping 
sweat off his face. “I couldn’t hear anything. ...” 

But Hermione gave a sudden gasp, pointing down the 
corridor. 

“Loo/c!” 

Something was shining on the wall ahead. They 
approached slowly, squinting through the darkness. 
Foot-high words had been daubed on the wall 
between two windows, shimmering in the light cast by 
the flaming torches. 

THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS HAS BEEN OPENED. 
ENEMIES OF THE HEIR, BEWARE. 

“What’s that thing — hanging underneath?” said Ron, 
a slight quiver in his voice. 

As they edged nearer, Harry almost slipped — there 
was a large puddle of water on the floor; Ron and 
Hermione grabbed him, and they inched toward the 
message, eyes fixed on a dark shadow beneath it. All 
three of them realized what it was at once, and leapt 
backward with a splash. 



Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Norris, the caretaker’s cat, was hanging by her 
tail from the torch bracket. She was stiff as a board, 
her eyes wide and staring. 

For a few seconds, they didn’t move. Then Ron said, 
“Let’s get out of here.” 

“Shouldn’t we try and help — ” Harry began 
awkwardly. 

“Trust me,” said Ron. “We don’t want to be found 
here.” 

But it was too late. A rumble, as though of distant 
thunder, told them that the feast had just ended. 
From either end of the corridor where they stood 
came the sound of hundreds of feet climbing the 
stairs, and the loud, happy talk of well-fed people; 
next moment, students were crashing into the 
passage from both ends. 

The chatter, the bustle, the noise died suddenly as 
the people in front spotted the hanging cat. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione stood alone, in the middle of the 
corridor, as silence fell among the mass of students 
pressing forward to see the grisly sight. 

Then someone shouted through the quiet. 

“Enemies of the Heir, beware! You’ll be next, 
Mudbloods!” 

It was Draco Malfoy. He had pushed to the front of 
the crowd, his cold eyes alive, his usually bloodless 
face flushed, as he grinned at the sight of the 
hanging, immobile cat. 



Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




9 




THE WRITING ON THE WALL 

“What’s going on here? What’s going on?” 

Attracted no doubt by Malfoy’s shout, Argus Filch 
came shouldering his way through the crowd. Then 
he saw Mrs. Norris and fell back, clutching his face in 
horror. 

“My cat! My cat! What’s happened to Mrs. Norris?” he 
shrieked. 

And his popping eyes fell on Harry. 

“You!” he screeched. “You! You’ve murdered my cat! 
You’ve killed her! I’ll kill you! I’ll — ” 

“Argus'.” 

Dumbledore had arrived on the scene, followed by a 
number of other teachers. In seconds, he had swept 
past Harry, Ron, and Hermione and detached Mrs. 
Norris from the torch bracket. 



Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



“Come with me, Argus,” he said to Filch. “You, too, 

Mr. Potter, Mr. Weasley, Miss Granger.” 

Lockhart stepped forward eagerly. 

“My office is nearest, Headmaster — just upstairs — 
please feel free — ” 

“Thank you, Gilderoy,” said Dumbledore. 

The silent crowd parted to let them pass. Lockhart, 
looking excited and important, hurried after 
Dumbledore; so did Professors McGonagall and 
Snape. 

As they entered Lockhart’s darkened office there was 
a flurry of movement across the walls; Harry saw 
several of the Lockharts in the pictures dodging out of 
sight, their hair in rollers. The real Lockhart lit the 
candles on his desk and stood back. Dumbledore laid 
Mrs. Norris on the polished surface and began to 
examine her. Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchanged 
tense looks and sank into chairs outside the pool of 
candlelight, watching. 

The tip of Dumbledore ’s long, crooked nose was 
barely an inch from Mrs. Norris’s fur. He was looking 
at her closely through his half-moon spectacles, his 
long fingers gently prodding and poking. Professor 
McGonagall was bent almost as close, her eyes 
narrowed. Snape loomed behind them, half in 
shadow, wearing a most peculiar expression: It was 
as though he was trying hard not to smile. And 
Lockhart was hovering around all of them, making 
suggestions. 

“It was definitely a curse that killed her — probably 
the Trans-mogrifian Torture — I’ve seen it used many 



Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




times, so unlucky I wasn’t there, I know the very 
countercurse that would have saved her. ...” 

Lockhart’s comments were punctuated by Filch ’s dry, 
racking sobs. He was slumped in a chair by the desk, 
unable to look at Mrs. Norris, his face in his hands. 
Much as he detested Filch, Harry couldn’t help feeling 
a bit sorry for him, though not nearly as sorry as he 
felt for himself. If Dumbledore believed Filch, he 
would be expelled for sure. 

Dumbledore was now muttering strange words under 
his breath and tapping Mrs. Norris with his wand but 
nothing happened: She continued to look as though 
she had been recently stuffed. 

"... I remember something very similar happening in 
Ouagadougou,” said Lockhart, “a series of attacks, 
the full story’s in my autobiography, I was able to 
provide the townsfolk with various amulets, which 
cleared the matter up at once. ...” 

The photographs of Lockhart on the walls were all 
nodding in agreement as he talked. One of them had 
forgotten to remove his hair net. 

At last Dumbledore straightened up. 

“She’s not dead, Argus,” he said softly. 

Lockhart stopped abruptly in the middle of counting 
the number of murders he had prevented. 

“Not dead?” choked Filch, looking through his fingers 
at Mrs. Norris. “But why’s she all — all stiff and 
frozen?” 



Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“She has been Petrified,” said Dumbledore (“Ah! I 
thought so!” said Lockhart). “But how, I cannot say. 



“Ask him\” shrieked Filch, turning his blotched and 
tearstained face to Harry. 

“No second year could have done this,” said 
Dumbledore firmly. “It would take Dark Magic of the 
most advanced — ” 

“He did it, he did it!” Filch spat, his pouchy face 
purpling. “You saw what he wrote on the wall! He 
found — in my office — he knows I’m a — I’m a — ” 
Filch ’s face worked horribly. “He knows I’m a Squib!” 
he finished. 

“I never touched Mrs. Norris!” Harry said loudly, 
uncomfortably aware of everyone looking at him, 
including all the Lockharts on the walls. “And I don’t 
even know what a Squib is.” 

“Rubbish!” snarled Filch. “He saw my Kwikspell 
letter!” 

“If I might speak, Headmaster,” said Snape from the 
shadows, and Harry’s sense of foreboding increased; 
he was sure nothing Snape had to say was going to 
do him any good. 

“Potter and his friends may have simply been in the 
wrong place at the wrong time,” he said, a slight sneer 
curling his mouth as though he doubted it. “But we 
do have a set of suspicious circumstances here. Why 
was he in the upstairs corridor at all? Why wasn’t he 
at the Halloween feast?” 



Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, Ron and Hermione all launched into an 
explanation about the deathday party. "... there were 
hundreds of ghosts, they’ll tell you we were there — ” 

“But why not join the feast afterward?” said Snape, 
his black eyes glittering in the candlelight. “Why go 
up to that corridor?” 

Ron and Hermione looked at Harry. 

“Because — because — ” Harry said, his heart 
thumping very fast; something told him it would 
sound very far-fetched if he told them he had been led 
there by a bodiless voice no one but he could hear, 
“because we were tired and wanted to go to bed,” he 
said. 

“Without any supper?” said Snape, a triumphant 
smile flickering across his gaunt face. “I didn’t think 
ghosts provided food fit for living people at their 
parties.” 

“We weren’t hungry,” said Ron loudly as his stomach 
gave a huge rumble. 

Snape’s nasty smile widened. 

“I suggest, Headmaster, that Potter is not being 
entirely truthful,” he said. “It might be a good idea if 
he were deprived of certain privileges until he is ready 
to tell us the whole story. I personally feel he should 
be taken off the Gryffindor Quidditch team until he is 
ready to be honest.” 

“Really, Severus,” said Professor McGonagall sharply, 
“I see no reason to stop the boy playing Quidditch. 
This cat wasn’t hit over the head with a broomstick. 
There is no evidence at all that Potter has done 
anything wrong.” 

Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore was giving Harry a searching look. His 
twinkling light-blue gaze made Harry feel as though 
he were being X-rayed. 

“Innocent until proven guilty, Severus,” he said 
firmly. 

Snape looked furious. So did Filch. 

“My cat has been Petrified!” he shrieked, his eyes 
popping. “I want to see some punishmenti” 

“We will be able to cure her, Argus,” said Dumbledore 
patiently. “Professer Sprout recently managed to 
procure some Mandrakes. As soon as they have 
reached their full size, I will have a potion made that 
will revive Mrs. Norris.” 

“I’ll make it,” Lockhart butted in. “I must have done it 
a hundred times. I could whip up a Mandrake 
Restorative Draught in my sleep — ” 

“Excuse me,” said Snape icily. “But I believe I am the 
Potions master at this school.” 

There was a very awkward pause. 

“You may go,” Dumbledore said to Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione. 

They went, as quickly as they could without actually 
running. When they were a floor up from Lockhart’s 
office, they turned into an empty classroom and 
closed the door quietly behind them. Harry squinted 
at his friends’ darkened faces. 

“D’you think I should have told them about that voice 
I heard?” 



Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Ron, without hesitation. “Hearing voices no 
one else can hear isn’t a good sign, even in the 
wizarding world.” 

Something in Ron’s voice made Harry ask, “You do 
believe me, don’t you?” 

“ ’Course I do,” said Ron quickly. “But — you must 
admit it’s weird. ...” 

“I know it’s weird,” said Harry. “The whole thing’s 
weird. What was that writing on the wall about? The 
Chamber Has Been Opened’. ... What’s that supposed 
to mean?” 

“You know, it rings a sort of bell,” said Ron slowly. “I 
think someone told me a story about a secret 
chamber at Hogwarts once ... might’ve been Bill. ...” 

“And what on earth’s a Squib?” said Harry. 

To his surprise, Ron stifled a snigger. 

“Well — it’s not funny really — but as it’s Filch,” he 
said. “A Squib is someone who was born into a 
wizarding family but hasn’t got any magic powers. 
Kind of the opposite of Muggle-born wizards, but 
Squibs are quite unusual. If Filch ’s trying to learn 
magic from a Kwikspell course, I reckon he must be a 
Squib. It would explain a lot. Like why he hates 
students so much.” Ron gave a satisfied smile. “He’s 
bitter.” 

A clock chimed somewhere. 

“Midnight,” said Harry. “We’d better get to bed before 
Snape comes along and tries to frame us for 
something else.” 



Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




For a few days, the school could talk of little else but 
the attack on Mrs. Norris. Filch kept it fresh in 
everyone’s minds by pacing the spot where she had 
been attacked, as though he thought the attacker 
might come back. Harry had seen him scrubbing the 
message on the wall with Mrs. Skower’s All-Purpose 
Magical Mess Remover, but to no effect; the words 
still gleamed as brightly as ever on the stone. When 
Filch wasn’t guarding the scene of the crime, he was 
skulking red-eyed through the corridors, lunging out 
at unsuspecting students and trying to put them in 
detention for things like “breathing loudly” and 
“looking happy.” 

Ginny Weasley seemed very disturbed by Mrs. 

Norris’s fate. According to Ron, she was a great cat 
lover. 

“But you haven’t really got to know Mrs. Norris,” Ron 
told her bracingly. “Honestly, we’re much better off 
without her.” Ginny ’s lip trembled. “Stuff like this 
doesn’t often happen at Hogwarts,” Ron assured her. 
“They’ll catch the maniac who did it and have him out 
of here in no time. I just hope he’s got time to Petrify 
Filch before he’s expelled. I’m only joking — ” Ron 
added hastily as Ginny blanched. 

The attack had also had an effect on Hermione. It was 
quite usual for Hermione to spend a lot of time 
reading, but she was now doing almost nothing else. 
Nor could Harry and Ron get much response from her 
when they asked what she was up to, and not until 
the following Wednesday did they find out. 

Harry had been held back in Potions, where Snape 
had made him stay behind to scrape tubeworms off 



Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




the desks. After a hurried lunch, he went upstairs to 
meet Ron in the library, and saw Justin Finch- 
Fletchley, the Hufflepuff boy from Herbology, coming 
toward him. Harry had just opened his mouth to say 
hello when Justin caught sight of him, turned 
abruptly, and sped off in the opposite direction. 

Harry found Ron at the back of the library, measuring 
his History of Magic homework. Professor Binns had 
asked for a three-foot-long composition on “The 
Medieval Assembly of European Wizards.” 

“I don’t believe it, I’m still eight inches short. ...” said 
Ron furiously, letting go of his parchment, which 
sprang back into a roll. “And Hermione’s done four 
feet seven inches and her writing’s tiny.” 

“Where is she?” asked Harry, grabbing the tape 
measure and unrolling his own homework. 

“Somewhere over there,” said Ron, pointing along the 
shelves. “Looking for another book. I think she’s 
trying to read the whole library before Christmas.” 

Harry told Ron about Justin Finch-Fletchley running 
away from him. 

“Dunno why you care. I thought he was a bit of an 
idiot,” said Ron, scribbling away, making his writing 
as large as possible. “All that junk about Lockhart 
being so great — ” 

Hermione emerged from between the bookshelves. 

She looked irritable and at last seemed ready to talk 
to them. 

“All the copies of Hogwarts, A History have been taken 
out,” she said, sitting down next to Harry and Ron. 
“And there’s a two-week waiting list. I wish I hadn’t 

Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




left my copy at home, but I couldn’t fit it in my trunk 
with all the Lockhart books.” 



“Why do you want it?” said Harry. 

“The same reason everyone else wants it,” said 
Hermione, “to read up on the legend of the Chamber 
of Secrets.” 

“What’s that?” said Harry quickly. 

“That’s just it. I can’t remember,” said Hermione, 
biting her lip. “And I can’t find the story anywhere 
else — ” 

“Hermione, let me read your composition,” said Ron 
desperately, checking his watch. 

“No, I won’t,” said Hermione, suddenly severe. “You’ve 
had ten days to finish it — ” 

“I only need another two inches, come on — ” 

The bell rang. Ron and Hermione led the way to 
History of Magic, bickering. 

History of Magic was the dullest subject on their 
schedule. Professor Binns, who taught it, was their 
only ghost teacher, and the most exciting thing that 
ever happened in his classes was his entering the 
room through the blackboard. Ancient and shriveled, 
many people said he hadn’t noticed he was dead. He 
had simply got up to teach one day and left his body 
behind him in an armchair in front of the staffroom 
fire; his routine had not varied in the slightest since. 

Today was as boring as ever. Professor Binns opened 
his notes and began to read in a flat drone like an old 
vacuum cleaner until nearly everyone in the class was 

Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




in a deep stupor, occasionally coming to long enough 
to copy down a name or date, then falling asleep 
again. He had been speaking for half an hour when 
something happened that had never happened before. 
Hermione put up her hand. 

Professor Binns, glancing up in the middle of a deadly 
dull lecture on the International Warlock Convention 
of 1289, looked amazed. 

“Miss — er — ?” 

“Granger, Professor. I was wondering if you could tell 
us anything about the Chamber of Secrets,” said 
Hermione in a clear voice. 

Dean Thomas, who had been sitting with his mouth 
hanging open, gazing out of the window, jerked out of 
his trance; Lavender Brown’s head came up off her 
arms and Neville Longbottom’s elbow slipped off his 
desk. 

Professor Binns blinked. 

“My subject is History of Magic,” he said in his dry, 
wheezy voice. “I deal with, facts, Miss Granger, not 
myths and legends.” He cleared his throat with a 
small noise like chalk snapping and continued, “In 
September of that year, a subcommittee of Sardinian 
sorcerers — ” 

He stuttered to a halt. Hermione’s hand was waving 
in the air again. 

“Miss Grant?” 

“Please, sir, don’t legends always have a basis in 
fact?” 



Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Professor Binns was looking at her in such 
amazement, Harry was sure no student had ever 
interrupted him before, alive or dead. 

“Well,” said Professor Binns slowly, “yes, one could 
argue that, I suppose.” He peered at Hermione as 
though he had never seen a student properly before. 
“However, the legend of which you speak is such a 
very sensational, even ludicrous tale — ” 

But the whole class was now hanging on Professor 
Binns ’s every word. He looked dimly at them all, every 
face turned to his. Harry could tell he was completely 
thrown by such an unusual show of interest. 

“Oh, very well,” he said slowly. “Let me see ... the 
Chamber of Secrets . . . 

“You all know, of course, that Hogwarts was founded 
over a thousand years ago — the precise date is 
uncertain — by the four greatest witches and wizards 
of the age. The four school Houses are named after 
them: Godric Gryffindor, Helga Hufflepuff, Rowena 
Ravenclaw, and Salazar Slytherin. They built this 
castle together, far from prying Muggle eyes, for it was 
an age when magic was feared by common people, 
and witches and wizards suffered much persecution.” 

He paused, gazed blearily around the room, and 
continued. 

“For a few years, the founders worked in harmony 
together, seeking out youngsters who showed signs of 
magic and bringing them to the castle to be educated. 
But then disagreements sprang up between them. A 
rift began to grow between Slytherin and the others. 
Slytherin wished to be more selective about the 
students admitted to Hogwarts. He believed that 
magical learning should be kept within all-magic 
Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




families. He disliked taking students of Muggle 
parentage, believing them to be untrustworthy. After 
a while, there was a serious argument on the subject 
between Slytherin and Gryffindor, and Slytherin left 
the school.” 

Professor Binns paused again, pursing his lips, 
looking like a wrinkled old tortoise. 

“Reliable historical sources tell us this much,” he 
said. “But these honest facts have been obscured by 
the fanciful legend of the Chamber of Secrets. The 
story goes that Slytherin had built a hidden chamber 
in the castle, of which the other founders knew 
nothing. 

“Slytherin, according to the legend, sealed the 
Chamber of Secrets so that none would be able to 
open it until his own true heir arrived at the school. 
The heir alone would be able to unseal the Chamber 
of Secrets, unleash the horror within, and use it to 
purge the school of all who were unworthy to study 
magic.” 

There was silence as he finished telling the story, but 
it wasn’t the usual, sleepy silence that filled Professor 
Binns ’s classes. There was unease in the air as 
everyone continued to watch him, hoping for more. 
Professor Binns looked faintly annoyed. 

“The whole thing is arrant nonsense, of course,” he 
said. “Naturally, the school has been searched for 
evidence of such a chamber, many times, by the most 
learned witches and wizards. It does not exist. A tale 
told to frighten the gullible.” 

Hermione’s hand was back in the air. 



Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Sir — what exactly do you mean by the ‘horror 
within’ the Chamber?” 

“That is believed to be some sort of monster, which 
the Heir of Slytherin alone can control,” said Professor 
Binns in his dry, reedy voice. 

The class exchanged nervous looks. 

“I tell you, the thing does not exist,” said Professor 
Binns, shuffling his notes. “There is no Chamber and 
no monster.” 

“But, sir,” said Seamus Finnigan, “if the Chamber can 
only be opened by Slytherin’s true heir, no one else 
would be able to find it, would they?” 

“Nonsense, O’Flaherty,” said Professor Binns in an 
aggravated tone. “If a long succession of Hogwarts 
headmasters and headmistresses haven’t found the 
thing — ” 

“But, Professor,” piped up Parvati Patil, “you’d 
probably have to use Dark Magic to open it — ” 

“Just because a wizard doesn’t use Dark Magic 
doesn’t mean he can’t, Miss Pennyfeather,” snapped 
Professor Binns. “I repeat, if the likes of Dumbledore 



“But maybe you’ve got to be related to Slytherin, so 
Dumbledore couldn’t — ” began Dean Thomas, but 
Professor Binns had had enough. 

“That will do,” he said sharply. “It is a myth! It does 
not exist! There is not a shred of evidence that 
Slytherin ever built so much as a secret broom 
cupboard! I regret telling you such a foolish story! We 



Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




will return, if you please, to history, to solid, 
believable, verifiable facti” 



And within five minutes, the class had sunk back into 
its usual torpor. 

“I always knew Salazar Slytherin was a twisted old 
loony,” Ron told Harry and Hermione as they fought 
their way through the teeming corridors at the end of 
the lesson to drop off their bags before dinner. “But I 
never knew he started all this pure-blood stuff. I 
wouldn’t be in his House if you paid me. Honestly, if 
the Sorting Hat had tried to put me in Slytherin, I’d’ve 
got the train straight back home. ...” 

Hermione nodded fervently, but Harry didn’t say 
anything. His stomach had just dropped 
unpleasantly. 

Harry had never told Ron and Hermione that the 
Sorting Hat had seriously considered putting him in 
Slytherin. He could remember, as though it were 
yesterday, the small voice that had spoken in his ear 
when he’d placed the hat on his head a year before: 
You could be great, you know, it’s all here in your 
head, and Slytherin would help you on the way to 
greatness, no doubt about that. . . . 

But Harry, who had already heard of Slytherin 
House’s reputation for turning out Dark wizards, had 
thought desperately, Not Slytherin ! and the hat had 
said, Oh, well, if you’re sure ... better be Gryffindor. ... 

As they were shunted along in the throng, Colin 
Creevey went past. 

“Hiya, Harry!” 

“Hullo, Colin,” said Harry automatically. 

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry — Harry — a boy in my class has been saying 
you’re — ” 



But Colin was so small he couldn’t fight against the 
tide of people bearing him toward the Great Hall; they 
heard him squeak, “See you, Harry!” and he was 
gone. 

“What’s a boy in his class saying about you?” 
Hermione wondered. 

“That I’m Slytherin’s heir, I expect,” said Harry, his 
stomach dropping another inch or so as he suddenly 
remembered the way Justin Finch-Fletchley had run 
away from him at lunchtime. 

“People here’ll believe anything,” said Ron in disgust. 

The crowd thinned and they were able to climb the 
next staircase without difficulty. 

“D’you really think there’s a Chamber of Secrets?” 

Ron asked Hermione. 

“I don’t know,” she said, frowning. “Dumbledore 
couldn’t cure Mrs. Norris, and that makes me think 
that whatever attacked her might not be — well — 
human.” 

As she spoke, they turned a corner and found 
themselves at the end of the very corridor where the 
attack had happened. They stopped and looked. The 
scene was just as it had been that night, except that 
there was no stiff cat hanging from the torch bracket, 
and an empty chair stood against the wall bearing the 
message “The Chamber of Secrets Has Been Opened.” 

“That’s where Filch has been keeping guard,” Ron 
muttered. 

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




They looked at each other. The corridor was deserted. 



“Can’t hurt to have a poke around,” said Harry, 
dropping his bag and getting to his hands and knees 
so that he could crawl along, searching for clues. 

“Scorch marks!” he said. “Here — and here — ” 

“Come and look at this!” said Hermione. “This is 
funny. ...” 

Harry got up and crossed to the window next to the 
message on the wall. Hermione was pointing at the 
topmost pane, where around twenty spiders were 
scuttling, apparently fighting to get through a small 
crack. A long, silvery thread was dangling like a rope, 
as though they had all climbed it in their hurry to get 
outside. 

“Have you ever seen spiders act like that?” said 
Hermione wonderingly. 

“No,” said Harry, “have you, Ron? Ron?” 

He looked over his shoulder. Ron was standing well 
back and seemed to be fighting the impulse to run. 

“What’s up?” said Harry. 

“I — don’t — like — spiders,” said Ron tensely. 

“I never knew that,” said Hermione, looking at Ron in 
surprise. “You’ve used spiders in Potions loads of 
times. ...” 

“I don’t mind them dead,” said Ron, who was carefully 
looking anywhere but at the window. “I just don’t like 
the way they move. ...” 

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione giggled. 



“It’s not funny,” said Ron, fiercely. “If you must know, 
when I was three, Fred turned my — my teddy bear 
into a great big filthy spider because I broke his toy 
broomstick. ... You wouldn’t like them either if you’d 
been holding your bear and suddenly it had too many 
legs and ...” 

He broke off, shuddering. Hermione was obviously 
still trying not to laugh. Feeling they had better get off 
the subject, Harry said, “Remember all that water on 
the floor? Where did that come from? Someone’s 
mopped it up.” 

“It was about here,” said Ron, recovering himself to 
walk a few paces past Filch’s chair and pointing. 

“Level with this door.” 

He reached for the brass doorknob but suddenly 
withdrew his hand as though he’d been burned. 

“What’s the matter?” said Harry. 

“Can’t go in there,” said Ron gruffly. “That’s a girls’ 
toilet.” 

“Oh, Ron, there won’t be anyone in there,” said 
Hermione, standing up and coming over. “That’s 
Moaning Myrtle’s place. Come on, let’s have a look.” 

And ignoring the large OUT OF ORDER sign, she 
opened the door. 

It was the gloomiest, most depressing bathroom Harry 
had ever set foot in. Under a large, cracked, and 
spotted mirror were a row of chipped sinks. The floor 
was damp and reflected the dull light given off by the 
stubs of a few candles, burning low in their holders; 
Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




the wooden doors to the stalls were flaking and 
scratched and one of them was dangling off its 
hinges. 

Hermione put her fingers to her lips and set off 
toward the end stall. When she reached it she said, 
“Hello, Myrtle, how are you?” 

Harry and Ron went to look. Moaning Myrtle was 
floating above the tank of the toilet, picking a spot on 
her chin. 

“This is a girls’ bathroom,” she said, eyeing Ron and 
Harry suspiciously. “They’re not girls.” 

“No,” Hermione agreed. “I just wanted to show them 
how — er — nice it is in here.” 

She waved vaguely at the dirty old mirror and the 
damp floor. 

“Ask her if she saw anything,” Harry mouthed at 
Hermione. 

“What are you whispering?” said Myrtle, staring at 
him. 

“Nothing,” said Harry quickly. “We wanted to ask — ” 

“I wish people would stop talking behind my back!” 
said Myrtle, in a voice choked with tears. “I do have 
feelings, you know, even if I am dead — ” 

“Myrtle, no one wants to upset you,” said Hermione. 
“Harry only — ” 

“No one wants to upset me! That’s a good one!” 
howled Myrtle. “My life was nothing but misery at this 
place and now people come along ruining my death!” 

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“We wanted to ask you if you’ve seen anything funny 
lately,” said Hermione quickly. “Because a cat was 
attacked right outside your front door on Halloween.” 

“Did you see anyone near here that night?” said 
Harry. 

“I wasn’t paying attention,” said Myrtle dramatically. 
“Peeves upset me so much I came in here and tried to 
kill myself. Then, of course, I remembered that I’m — 
that I’m — ” 

“Already dead,” said Ron helpfully. 

Myrtle gave a tragic sob, rose up in the air, turned 
over, and dived headfirst into the toilet, splashing 
water all over them and vanishing from sight, 
although from the direction of her muffled sobs, she 
had come to rest somewhere in the U-bend. 

Harry and Ron stood with their mouths open, but 
Hermione shrugged wearily and said, “Honestly, that 
was almost cheerful for Myrtle. ... Come on, let’s go.” 

Harry had barely closed the door on Myrtle’s gurgling 
sobs when a loud voice made all three of them jump. 

“RON!” 

Percy Weasley had stopped dead at the head of the 
stairs, prefect badge agleam, an expression of 
complete shock on his face. 

“That’s a girls’ bathroom!” he gasped. “What were you 
— ?” 

“Just having a look around,” Ron shrugged. “Clues, 
you know — ” 



Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Percy swelled in a manner that reminded Harry 
forcefully of Mrs. Weasley. 



“Get — away — from — there — ” Percy said, striding 
toward them and starting to bustle them along, 
flapping his arms. “Don’t you care what this looks 
like? Coming back here while everyone’s at dinner — ” 

“Why shouldn’t we be here?” said Ron hotly, stopping 
short and glaring at Percy. “Listen, we never laid a 
finger on that cat!” 

“That’s what I told Ginny,” said Percy fiercely, “but 
she still seems to think you’re going to be expelled, 

I’ve never seen her so upset, crying her eyes out, you 
might think of her, all the first years are thoroughly 
overexcited by this business — ” 

“ You don’t care about Ginny,” said Ron, whose ears 
were now reddening. “You’re just worried I’m going to 
mess up your chances of being Head Boy — ” 

“Five points from Gryffindor!” Percy said tersely, 
fingering his prefect badge. “And I hope it teaches you 
a lesson! No more detective work, or I’ll write to 
Mum!” 

And he strode off, the back of his neck as red as 
Ron’s ears. 



Harry, Ron, and Hermione chose seats as far as 
possible from Percy in the common room that night. 
Ron was still in a very bad temper and kept blotting 
his Charms homework. When he reached absently for 
his wand to remove the smudges, it ignited the 
parchment. Fuming almost as much as his 
homework, Ron slammed The Standard Book of 
Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Spells, Grade 2 shut. To Harry’s surprise, Hermione 
followed suit. 

“Who can it be, though?” she said in a quiet voice, as 
though continuing a conversation they had just been 
having. “Who’d want to frighten all the Squibs and 
Muggle-borns out of Hogwarts?” 

“Let’s think,” said Ron in mock puzzlement. “Who do 
we know who thinks Muggle-borns are scum?” 

He looked at Hermione. Hermione looked back, 
unconvinced. 

“If you’re talking about Malfoy — ” 

“Of course I am!” said Ron. “You heard him — ‘You’ll 
be next, MudbloodsV — come on, you’ve only got to 
look at his foul rat face to know it’s him — ” 

“Malfoy, the Heir of Slytherin?” said Hermione 
skeptically. 

“Look at his family,” said Harry, closing his books, 
too. “The whole lot of them have been in Slytherin; 
he’s always boasting about it. They could easily be 
Slytherin’s descendants. His father’s definitely evil 
enough.” 

“They could’ve had the key to the Chamber of Secrets 
for centuries!” said Ron. “Handing it down, father to 
son. ...” 

“Well,” said Hermione cautiously, “I suppose it’s 
possible. ...” 

“But how do we prove it?” said Harry darkly. 



Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“There might be a way,” said Hermione slowly, 
dropping her voice still further with a quick glance 
across the room at Percy. “Of course, it would be 
difficult. And dangerous, very dangerous. We’d be 
breaking about fifty school rules, I expect — ” 

“If, in a month or so, you feel like explaining, you will 
let us know, won’t you?” said Ron irritably. 

“All right,” said Hermione coldly. “What we’d need to 
do is to get inside the Slytherin common room and 
ask Malfoy a few questions without him realizing it’s 
us.” 



“But that’s impossible,” Harry said as Ron laughed. 

“No, it’s not,” said Hermione. “All we’d need would be 
some Polyjuice Potion.” 

“What’s that?” said Ron and Harry together. 

“Snape mentioned it in class a few weeks ago — ” 

“D’you think we’ve got nothing better to do in Potions 
than listen to Snape?” muttered Ron. 

“It transforms you into somebody else. Think about it! 
We could change into three of the Slytherins. No one 
would know it was us. Malfoy would probably tell us 
anything. He’s probably boasting about it in the 
Slytherin common room right now, if only we could 
hear him.” 

“This Polyjuice stuff sounds a bit dodgy to me,” said 
Ron, frowning. “What if we were stuck looking like 
three of the Slytherins forever?” 

“It wears off after a while,” said Hermione, waving her 
hand impatiently. “But getting hold of the recipe will 

Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




be very difficult. Snape said it was in a book called 
Moste Potente Potions and it’s bound to be in the 
Restricted Section of the library.” 

There was only one way to get out a book from the 
Restricted Section: You needed a signed note of 
permission from a teacher. 

“Hard to see why we’d want the book, really,” said 
Ron, “if we weren’t going to try and make one of the 
potions.” 

“I think,” said Hermione, “that if we made it sound as 
though we were just interested in the theory, we 
might stand a chance. ...” 

“Oh, come on, no teacher’s going to fall for that,” said 
Ron. “They’d have to be really thick. ...” 



Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




10 




THE ROGUE BLUDGER 

Since the disastrous episode of the pixies, Professor 
Lockhart had not brought live creatures to class. 
Instead, he read passages from his books to them, 
and sometimes reenacted some of the more dramatic 
bits. He usually picked Harry to help him with these 
reconstructions; so far, Harry had been forced to play 
a simple Transylvanian villager whom Lockhart had 
cured of a Babbling Curse, a yeti with a head cold, 
and a vampire who had been unable to eat anything 
except lettuce since Lockhart had dealt with him. 

Harry was hauled to the front of the class during their 
very next Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson, this 
time acting a werewolf. If he hadn’t had a very good 
reason for keeping Lockhart in a good mood, he would 
have refused to do it. 

“Nice loud howl, Harry — exactly — and then, if you’ll 
believe it, I pounced — like this — slammed him to 
the floor — thus — with one hand, I managed to hold 
him down — with my other, I put my wand to his 
throat — I then screwed up my remaining strength 
Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets- J.K. Rowling 



and performed the immensely complex Homorphus 
Charm — he let out a piteous moan — go on, Harry — 
higher than that — good — the fur vanished — the 
fangs shrank — and he turned back into a man. 
Simple, yet effective — and another village will 
remember me forever as the hero who delivered them 
from the monthly terror of werewolf attacks.” 

The bell rang and Lockhart got to his feet. 

“Homework — compose a poem about my defeat of 
the Wagga Wagga Werewolf! Signed copies of Magical 
Me to the author of the best one!” 

The class began to leave. Harry returned to the back 
of the room, where Ron and Hermione were waiting. 

“Ready?” Harry muttered. 

“Wait till everyone’s gone,” said Hermione nervously. 
“All right ...” 

She approached Lockhart’s desk, a piece of paper 
clutched tightly in her hand, Harry and Ron right 
behind her. 

“Er — Professor Lockhart?” Hermione stammered. “I 
wanted to — to get this book out of the library. Just 
for background reading.” She held out the piece of 
paper, her hand shaking slightly. “But the thing is, 
it’s in the Restricted Section of the library, so I need a 
teacher to sign for it — I’m sure it would help me 
understand what you say in Gadding with Ghouls 
about slow-acting venoms — ” 

“Ah, Gadding with GhoulsV’ said Lockhart, taking the 
note from Hermione and smiling widely at her. 
“Possibly my very favorite book. You enjoyed it?” 



Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, yes,” said Hermione eagerly. “So clever, the way 
you trapped that last one with the tea-strainer — ” 

“Well, I’m sure no one will mind me giving the best 
student of the year a little extra help,” said Lockhart 
warmly, and he pulled out an enormous peacock 
quill. “Yes, nice, isn’t it?” he said, misreading the 
revolted look on Ron’s face. “I usually save it for book 
signings.” 

He scrawled an enormous loopy signature on the note 
and handed it back to Hermione. 

“So, Harry,” said Lockhart, while Hermione folded the 
note with fumbling fingers and slipped it into her bag. 
“Tomorrow’s the first Quidditch match of the season, I 
believe? Gryffindor against Slytherin, is it not? I hear 
you’re a useful player. I was a Seeker, too. I was 
asked to try for the National Squad, but preferred to 
dedicate my life to the eradication of the Dark Forces. 
Still, if ever you feel the need for a little private 
training, don’t hesitate to ask. Always happy to pass 
on my expertise to less able players. ...” 

Harry made an indistinct noise in his throat and then 
hurried off after Ron and Hermione. 

“I don’t believe it,” he said as the three of them 
examined the signature on the note. “He didn’t even 
look at the book we wanted.” 

“That’s because he’s a brainless git,” said Ron. “But 
who cares, we’ve got what we needed — ” 

“He is not a brainless git,” said Hermione shrilly as 
they half ran toward the library. 

“Just because he said you were the best student of 
the year — ” 

Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




They dropped their voices as they entered the muffled 
stillness of the library. Madam Pince, the librarian, 
was a thin, irritable woman who looked like an 
underfed vulture. 

“Moste Potente Potions?” she repeated suspiciously, 
trying to take the note from Hermione; but Hermione 
wouldn’t let go. 

“I was wondering if I could keep it,” she said 
breathlessly. 

“Oh, come on,” said Ron, wrenching it from her grasp 
and thrusting it at Madam Pince. “We’ll get you 
another autograph. Lockhart ’ll sign anything if it 
stands still long enough.” 

Madam Pince held the note up to the light, as though 
determined to detect a forgery, but it passed the test. 
She stalked away between the lofty shelves and 
returned several minutes later carrying a large and 
moldy-looking book. Hermione put it carefully into 
her bag and they left, trying not to walk too quickly or 
look too guilty. 

Five minutes later, they were barricaded in Moaning 
Myrtle’s out-of-order bathroom once again. Hermione 
had overridden Ron’s objections by pointing out that 
it was the last place anyone in their right minds 
would go, so they were guaranteed some privacy. 
Moaning Myrtle was crying noisily in her stall, but 
they were ignoring her, and she them. 

Hermione opened Moste Potente Potions carefully, and 
the three of them bent over the damp-spotted pages. 

It was clear from a glance why it belonged in the 
Restricted Section. Some of the potions had effects 
almost too gruesome to think about, and there were 
some very unpleasant illustrations, which included a 
Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




man who seemed to have been turned inside out and 
a witch sprouting several extra pairs of arms out of 
her head. 

“Here it is,” said Hermione excitedly as she found the 
page headed The Polyjuice Potion. It was decorated 
with drawings of people halfway through transforming 
into other people. Harry sincerely hoped the artist 
had imagined the looks of intense pain on their faces. 

“This is the most complicated potion I’ve ever seen,” 
said Hermione as they scanned the recipe. “Lacewing 
flies, leeches, fluxweed, and knotgrass,” she 
murmured, running her finger down the list of 
ingredients. “Well, they’re easy enough, they’re in the 
student store-cupboard, we can help ourselves. ... 
Oooh, look, powdered horn of a bicorn — don’t know 
where we’re going to get that — shredded skin of a 
boomslang — thatll be tricky, too — and of course a 
bit of whoever we want to change into.” 

“Excuse me?” said Ron sharply. “What d’you mean, a 
bit of whoever we’re changing into? I’m drinking 
nothing with Crabbe’s toenails in it — ” 

Hermione continued as though she hadn’t heard him. 

“We don’t have to worry about that yet, though, 
because we add those bits last. ...” 

Ron turned, speechless, to Harry, who had another 
worry. 

“D’you realize how much we’re going to have to steal, 
Hermione? Shredded skin of a boomslang, that’s 
definitely not in the students’ cupboard. What’re we 
going to do, break into Snape’s private stores? I don’t 
know if this is a good idea. ...” 



Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione shut the book with a snap. 



“Well, if you two are going to chicken out, fine,” she 
said. There were bright pink patches on her cheeks 
and her eyes were brighter than usual. “ I don’t want 
to break rules, you know. / think threatening Muggle- 
borns is far worse than brewing up a difficult potion. 
But if you don’t want to find out if it’s Malfoy, I’ll go 
straight to Madam Pince now and hand the book back 
in — ” 



“I never thought I’d see the day when you’d be 
persuading us to break rules,” said Ron. “All right, 
we’ll do it. But not toenails, okay?” 

“How long will it take to make, anyway?” said Harry 
as Hermione, looking happier, opened the book again. 

“Well, since the fluxweed has got to be picked at the 
full moon and the lacewings have got to be stewed for 
twenty-one days ... I’d say it’d be ready in about a 
month, if we can get all the ingredients.” 

“A month?” said Ron. “Malfoy could have attacked 
half the Muggle-borns in the school by then!” But 
Hermione ’s eyes narrowed dangerously again, and he 
added swiftly, “But it’s the best plan we’ve got, so full 
steam ahead, I say.” 

However, while Hermione was checking that the coast 
was clear for them to leave the bathroom, Ron 
muttered to Harry, “It’ll be a lot less hassle if you can 
just knock Malfoy off his broom tomorrow.” 

Harry woke early on Saturday morning and lay for a 
while thinking about the coming Quidditch match. He 
was nervous, mainly at the thought of what Wood 
would say if Gryffindor lost, but also at the idea of 
facing a team mounted on the fastest racing brooms 
Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




gold could buy. He had never wanted to beat 
Slytherin so badly. After half an hour of lying there 
with his insides churning, he got up, dressed, and 
went down to breakfast early, where he found the rest 
of the Gryffindor team huddled at the long, empty 
table, all looking uptight and not speaking much. 

As eleven o’clock approached, the whole school 
started to make its way down to the Quidditch 
stadium. It was a muggy sort of day with a hint of 
thunder in the air. Ron and Hermione came hurrying 
over to wish Harry good luck as he entered the locker 
rooms. The team pulled on their scarlet Gryffindor 
robes, then sat down to listen to Wood’s usual pre- 
match pep talk. 

“Slytherin has better brooms than us,” he began. “No 
point denying it. But we’ve got better people on our 
brooms. We’ve trained harder than they have, we’ve 
been flying in all weathers — ” (“Too true,” muttered 
George Weasley. “I haven’t been properly dry since 
August”) “ — and we’re going to make them rue the 
day they let that little bit of slime, Malfoy, buy his 
way onto their team.” 

Chest heaving with emotion, Wood turned to Harry. 

“It’ll be down to you, Harry, to show them that a 
Seeker has to have something more than a rich 
father. Get to that Snitch before Malfoy or die trying, 
Harry, because we’ve got to win today, we’ve got to.” 

“So no pressure, Harry,” said Fred, winking at him. 

As they walked out onto the field, a roar of noise 
greeted them; mainly cheers, because Ravenclaw and 
Hufflepuff were anxious to see Slytherin beaten, but 
the Slytherins in the crowd made their boos and 
hisses heard, too. Madam Hooch, the Quidditch 
Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




teacher, asked Flint and Wood to shake hands, which 
they did, giving each other threatening stares and 
gripping rather harder than was necessary. 

“On my whistle,” said Madam Hooch. “Three ... two ... 
one ...” 

With a roar from the crowd to speed them upward, 
the fourteen players rose toward the leaden sky. 

Harry flew higher than any of them, squinting around 
for the Snitch. 

“All right there, Scarhead?” yelled Malfoy, shooting 
underneath him as though to show off the speed of 
his broom. 

Harry had no time to reply. At that very moment, a 
heavy black Bludger came pelting toward him; he 
avoided it so narrowly that he felt it ruffle his hair as 
it passed. 

“Close one, Harry!” said George, streaking past him 
with his club in his hand, ready to knock the Bludger 
back toward a Slytherin. Harry saw George give the 
Bludger a powerful whack in the direction of Adrian 
Pucey, but the Bludger changed direction in midair 
and shot straight for Harry again. 

Harry dropped quickly to avoid it, and George 
managed to hit it hard toward Malfoy. Once again, the 
Bludger swerved like a boomerang and shot at Harry’s 
head. 

Harry put on a burst of speed and zoomed toward the 
other end of the field. He could hear the Bludger 
whistling along behind him. What was going on? 
Bludgers never concentrated on one player like this; it 
was their job to try and unseat as many people as 
possible. ... 

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Fred Weasley was waiting for the Bludger at the other 
end. Harry ducked as Fred swung at the Bludger with 
all his might; the Bludger was knocked off course. 

“Gotcha!” Fred yelled happily, but he was wrong; as 
though it was magnetically attracted to Harry, the 
Bludger pelted after him once more and Harry was 
forced to fly off at full speed. 

It had started to rain; Harry felt heavy drops fall onto 
his face, splattering onto his glasses. He didn’t have a 
clue what was going on in the rest of the game until 
he heard Lee Jordan, who was commentating, say, 
“Slytherin lead, sixty points to zero — ” 

The Slytherins’ superior brooms were clearly doing 
their jobs, and meanwhile the mad Bludger was doing 
all it could to knock Harry out of the air. Fred and 
George were now flying so close to him on either side 
that Harry could see nothing at all except their flailing 
arms and had no chance to look for the Snitch, let 
alone catch it. 

“Someone’s — tampered — with — this — Bludger — ” 
Fred grunted, swinging his bat with all his might at it 
as it launched a new attack on Harry. 

“We need time out,” said George, trying to signal to 
Wood and stop the Bludger breaking Harry’s nose at 
the same time. 

Wood had obviously got the message. Madam Hooch’s 
whistle rang out and Harry, Fred, and George dived 
for the ground, still trying to avoid the mad Bludger. 

“What’s going on?” said Wood as the Gryffindor team 
huddled together, while Slytherins in the crowd 
jeered. “We’re being flattened. Fred, George, where 



Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




were you when that Bludger stopped Angelina 
scoring?” 

“We were twenty feet above her, stopping the other 
Bludger from murdering Harry, Oliver,” said George 
angrily. “Someone’s fixed it — it won’t leave Harry 
alone. It hasn’t gone for anyone else all game. The 
Slytherins must have done something to it.” 

“But the Bludgers have been locked in Madam 
Hooch’s office since our last practice, and there was 
nothing wrong with them then. ...” said Wood, 
anxiously. 

Madam Hooch was walking toward them. Over her 
shoulder, Harry could see the Slytherin team jeering 
and pointing in his direction. 

“Listen,” said Harry as she came nearer and nearer, 
“with you two flying around me all the time the only 
way I’m going to catch the Snitch is if it flies up my 
sleeve. Go back to the rest of the team and let me deal 
with the rogue one.” 

“Don’t be thick,” said Fred. “It’ll take your head off.” 

Wood was looking from Harry to the Weasleys. 

“Oliver, this is insane,” said Alicia Spinnet angrily. 
“You can’t let Harry deal with that thing on his own. 
Let’s ask for an inquiry — ” 

“If we stop now, we’ll have to forfeit the match!” said 
Harry. “And we’re not losing to Slytherin just because 
of a crazy Bludger! Come on, Oliver, tell them to leave 
me alone!” 



Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“This is all your fault,” George said angrily to Wood. “ 
‘Get the Snitch or die trying,’ what a stupid thing to 
tell him—” 



Madam Hooch had joined them. 

“Ready to resume play?” she asked Wood. 

Wood looked at the determined look on Harry’s face. 

“All right,” he said. “Fred, George, you heard Harry — 
leave him alone and let him deal with the Bludger on 
his own.” 

The rain was falling more heavily now. On Madam 
Hooch’s whistle, Harry kicked hard into the air and 
heard the telltale whoosh of the Bludger behind him. 
Higher and higher Harry climbed; he looped and 
swooped, spiraled, zigzagged, and rolled. Slightly 
dizzy, he nevertheless kept his eyes wide open, rain 
was speckling his glasses and ran up his nostrils as 
he hung upside down, avoiding another fierce dive 
from the Bludger. He could hear laughter from the 
crowd; he knew he must look very stupid, but the 
rogue Bludger was heavy and couldn’t change 
direction as quickly as Harry could; he began a kind 
of roller-coaster ride around the edges of the stadium, 
squinting through the silver sheets of rain to the 
Gryffindor goal posts, where Adrian Pucey was trying 
to get past Wood — 

A whistling in Harry’s ear told him the Bludger had 
just missed him again; he turned right over and sped 
in the opposite direction. 

“Training for the ballet, Potter?” yelled Malfoy as 
Harry was forced to do a stupid kind of twirl in midair 
to dodge the Bludger, and he fled, the Bludger trailing 
a few feet behind him; and then, glaring back at 

Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy in hatred, he saw it — the Golden Snitch. It 
was hovering inches above Malfoy’s left ear — and 
Malfoy, busy laughing at Harry, hadn’t seen it. 

For an agonizing moment, Harry hung in midair, not 
daring to speed toward Malfoy in case he looked up 
and saw the Snitch. 

WHAM. 

He had stayed still a second too long. The Bludger 
had hit him at last, smashed into his elbow, and 
Harry felt his arm break. Dimly, dazed by the searing 
pain in his arm, he slid sideways on his rain- 
drenched broom, one knee still crooked over it, his 
right arm dangling useless at his side — the Bludger 
came pelting back for a second attack, this time 
aiming at his face — Harry swerved out of the way, 
one idea firmly lodged in his numb brain: get to 
Malfoy. 

Through a haze of rain and pain he dived for the 
shimmering, sneering face below him and saw its eyes 
widen with fear: Malfoy thought Harry was attacking 
him. 

“What the — ” he gasped, careening out of Harry’s 
way. 

Harry took his remaining hand off his broom and 
made a wild snatch; he felt his fingers close on the 
cold Snitch but was now only gripping the broom with 
his legs, and there was a yell from the crowd below as 
he headed straight for the ground, trying hard not to 
pass out. 

With a splattering thud he hit the mud and rolled off 
his broom. His arm was hanging at a very strange 
angle; riddled with pain, he heard, as though from a 

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




distance, a good deal of whistling and shouting. He 
focused on the Snitch clutched in his good hand. 

“Aha,” he said vaguely. “We’ve won.” 

And he fainted. 

He came around, rain falling on his face, still lying on 
the field, with someone leaning over him. He saw a 
glitter of teeth. 

“Oh, no, not you,” he moaned. 

“Doesn’t know what he’s saying,” said Lockhart loudly 
to the anxious crowd of Gryffindors pressing around 
them. “Not to worry, Harry. I’m about to fix your 
arm.” 

“iVo!” said Harry. “I’ll keep it like this, thanks. ...” 

He tried to sit up, but the pain was terrible. He heard 
a familiar clicking noise nearby. 

“I don’t want a photo of this, Colin,” he said loudly. 

“Lie back, Harry,” said Lockhart soothingly. “It’s a 
simple charm I’ve used countless times — ” 

“Why can’t I just go to the hospital wing?” said Harry 
through clenched teeth. 

“He should really, Professor,” said a muddy Wood, 
who couldn’t help grinning even though his Seeker 
was injured. “Great capture, Harry, really 
spectacular, your best yet, I’d say — ” 

Through the thicket of legs around him, Harry 
spotted Fred and George Weasley, wrestling the rogue 



Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Bludger into a box. It was still putting up a terrific 
fight. 

“Stand back,” said Lockhart, who was rolling up his 
jade-green sleeves. 

“No — don’t — ” said Harry weakly, but Lockhart was 
twirling his wand and a second later had directed it 
straight at Harry’s arm. 

A strange and unpleasant sensation started at Harry’s 
shoulder and spread all the way down to his 
fingertips. It felt as though his arm was being 
deflated. He didn’t dare look at what was happening. 
He had shut his eyes, his face turned away from his 
arm, but his worst fears were realized as the people 
above him gasped and Colin Creevey began clicking 
away madly. His arm didn’t hurt anymore — nor did 
it feel remotely like an arm. 

“Ah,” said Lockhart. “Yes. Well, that can sometimes 
happen. But the point is, the bones are no longer 
broken. That’s the thing to bear in mind. So, Harry, 
just toddle up to the hospital wing — ah, Mr. 

Weasley, Miss Granger, would you escort him? — and 
Madam Pomfrey will be able to — er — tidy you up a 
bit.” 

As Harry got to his feet, he felt strangely lopsided. 
Taking a deep breath he looked down at his right 
side. What he saw nearly made him pass out again. 

Poking out of the end of his robes was what looked 
like a thick, flesh-colored rubber glove. He tried to 
move his fingers. Nothing happened. 

Lockhart hadn’t mended Harry’s bones. He had 
removed them. 



Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Madam Pomfrey wasn’t at all pleased. 

“You should have come straight to me!” she raged, 
holding up the sad, limp remainder of what, half an 
hour before, had been a working arm. “I can mend 
bones in a second — but growing them back — ” 

“You will be able to, won’t you?” said Harry 
desperately. 

“I’ll be able to, certainly, but it will be painful,” said 
Madam Pomfrey grimly, throwing Harry a pair of 
pajamas. “You’ll have to stay the night. ...” 

Hermione waited outside the curtain drawn around 
Harry’s bed while Ron helped him into his pajamas. It 
took a while to stuff the rubbery, boneless arm into a 
sleeve. 

“How can you stick up for Lockhart now, Hermione, 
eh?” Ron called through the curtain as he pulled 
Harry’s limp fingers through the cuff. “If Harry had 
wanted deboning he would have asked.” 

“Anyone can make a mistake,” said Hermione. “And it 
doesn’t hurt anymore, does it, Harry?” 

“No,” said Harry, getting into bed. “But it doesn’t do 
anything else either.” 

As he swung himself onto the bed, his arm flapped 
pointlessly. 

Hermione and Madam Pomfrey came around the 
curtain. Madam Pomfrey was holding a large bottle of 
something labeled Skele-Gro. 



Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re in for a rough night,” she said, pouring out a 
steaming beakerful and handing it to him. “Regrowing 
bones is a nasty business.” 

So was taking the Skele-Gro. It burned Harry’s mouth 
and throat as it went down, making him cough and 
splutter. Still tut-tutting about dangerous sports and 
inept teachers, Madam Pomfrey retreated, leaving Ron 
and Hermione to help Harry gulp down some water. 

“We won, though,” said Ron, a grin breaking across 
his face. “That was some catch you made. Malfoy’s 
face ... he looked ready to kill. ...” 

“I want to know how he fixed that Bludger,” said 
Hermione darkly. 

“We can add that to the list of questions we’ll ask him 
when we’ve taken the Polyjuice Potion,” said Harry, 
sinking back onto his pillows. “I hope it tastes better 
than this stuff. ...” 

“If it’s got bits of Slytherins in it? You’ve got to be 
joking,” said Ron. 

The door of the hospital wing burst open at that 
moment. Filthy and soaking wet, the rest of the 
Gryffindor team had arrived to see Harry. 

“Unbelievable flying, Harry,” said George. “I’ve just 
seen Marcus Flint yelling at Malfoy. Something about 
having the Snitch on top of his head and not noticing. 
Malfoy didn’t seem too happy.” 

They had brought cakes, sweets, and bottles of 
pumpkin juice; they gathered around Harry’s bed and 
were just getting started on what promised to be a 
good party when Madam Pomfrey came storming over, 



Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




shouting, “This boy needs rest, he’s got thirty- three 
bones to regrow! Out! OUT!” 

And Harry was left alone, with nothing to distract him 
from the stabbing pains in his limp arm. 

Hours and hours later, Harry woke quite suddenly in 
the pitch blackness and gave a small yelp of pain: His 
arm now felt full of large splinters. For a second, he 
thought that was what had woken him. Then, with a 
thrill of horror, he realized that someone was 
sponging his forehead in the dark. 

“Get off!” he said loudly, and then, “Dobby\” 

The house-elf’s goggling tennis ball eyes were peering 
at Harry through the darkness. A single tear was 
running down his long, pointed nose. 

“Harry Potter came back to school,” he whispered 
miserably. “Dobby warned and warned Harry Potter. 
Ah sir, why didn’t you heed Dobby? Why didn’t Harry 
Potter go back home when he missed the train?” 

Harry heaved himself up on his pillows and pushed 
Dobby’s sponge away. 

“What’re you doing here?” he said. “And how did you 
know I missed the train?” 

Dobby’s lip trembled and Harry was seized by a 
sudden suspicion. 

“It was you!” he said slowly. “You stopped the barrier 
from letting us through!” 

“Indeed yes, sir,” said Dobby, nodding his head 
vigorously, ears flapping. “Dobby hid and watched for 
Harry Potter and sealed the gateway and Dobby had 

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




to iron his hands afterward” — he showed Harry ten 
long, bandaged fingers — “but Dobby didn’t care, sir, 
for he thought Harry Potter was safe, and never did 
Dobby dream that Harry Potter would get to school 
another way!” 

He was rocking backward and forward, shaking his 
ugly head. 

“Dobby was so shocked when he heard Harry Potter 
was back at Hogwarts, he let his master’s dinner 
burn! Such a flogging Dobby never had, sir. ...” 

Harry slumped back onto his pillows. 

“You nearly got Ron and me expelled,” he said 
fiercely. “You’d better get lost before my bones come 
back, Dobby, or I might strangle you.” 

Dobby smiled weakly. 

“Dobby is used to death threats, sir. Dobby gets them 
five times a day at home.” 

He blew his nose on a corner of the filthy pillowcase 
he wore, looking so pathetic that Harry felt his anger 
ebb away in spite of himself. 

“Why d’you wear that thing, Dobby?” he asked 
curiously. 

“This, sir?” said Dobby, plucking at the pillowcase. “ 
Tis a mark of the house-elf’s enslavement, sir. Dobby 
can only be freed if his masters present him with 
clothes, sir. The family is careful not to pass Dobby 
even a sock, sir, for then he would be free to leave 
their house forever.” 



Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Dobby mopped his bulging eyes and said suddenly, 
“Harry Potter must go home! Dobby thought his 
Bludger would be enough to make — ” 

“Your Bludger?” said Harry, anger rising once more. 
“What d’you mean, your Bludger? You made that 
Bludger try and kill me?” 

“Not kill you, sir, never kill you!” said Dobby, 
shocked. “Dobby wants to save Harry Potter’s life! 
Better sent home, grievously injured, than remain 
here, sir! Dobby only wanted Harry Potter hurt 
enough to be sent home!” 

“Oh, is that all?” said Harry angrily. “I don’t suppose 
you’re going to tell me why you wanted me sent home 
in pieces?” 

“Ah, if Harry Potter only knew!” Dobby groaned, more 
tears dripping onto his ragged pillowcase. “If he knew 
what he means to us, to the lowly, the enslaved, we 
dregs of the magical world! Dobby remembers how it 
was when He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named was at the 
height of his powers, sir! We house-elves were treated 
like vermin, sir! Of course, Dobby is still treated like 
that, sir,” he admitted, drying his face on the 
pillowcase. “But mostly, sir, life has improved for my 
kind since you triumphed over He-Who-Must-Not-Be- 
Named. Harry Potter survived, and the Dark Lord’s 
power was broken, and it was a new dawn, sir, and 
Harry Potter shone like a beacon of hope for those of 
us who thought the Dark days would never end, sir. 

... And now, at Hogwarts, terrible things are to 
happen, are perhaps happening already, and Dobby 
cannot let Harry Potter stay here now that history is 
to repeat itself, now that the Chamber of Secrets is 
open once more — ” 



Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Dobby froze, horrors truck, then grabbed Harry’s 
water jug from his bedside table and cracked it over 
his own head, toppling out of sight. A second later, he 
crawled back onto the bed, cross-eyed, muttering, 
“Bad Dobby, very bad Dobby ...” 

“So there is a Chamber of Secrets?” Harry whispered. 
“And — did you say it’s been opened before ? Tell me, 
Dobby!” 

He seized the elf’s bony wrist as Dobby’s hand inched 
toward the water jug. “But I’m not Muggle-born — 
how can I be in danger from the Chamber?” 

“Ah, sir, ask no more, ask no more of poor Dobby,” 
stammered the elf, his eyes huge in the dark. “Dark 
deeds are planned in this place, but Harry Potter 
must not be here when they happen — go home, 

Harry Potter, go home. Harry Potter must not meddle 
in this, sir, ’tis too dangerous — ” 

“Who is it, Dobby?” Harry said, keeping a firm hold on 
Dobby’s wrist to stop him from hitting himself with 
the water jug again. “Who’s opened it? Who opened it 
last time?” 

“Dobby can’t, sir, Dobby can’t, Dobby mustn’t tell!” 
squealed the elf. “Go home, Harry Potter, go home!” 

“I’m not going anywhere!” said Harry fiercely. “One of 
my best friends is Muggle-born; she’ll be first in line if 
the Chamber really has been opened — ” 

“Harry Potter risks his own life for his friends!” 
moaned Dobby in a kind of miserable ecstasy. “So 
noble! So valiant! But he must save himself, he must, 
Harry Potter must not — ” 



Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Dobby suddenly froze, his bat ears quivering. Harry 
heard it, too. There were footsteps coming down the 
passageway outside. 

“Dobby must go!” breathed the elf, terrified. There 
was a loud crack, and Harry’s fist was suddenly 
clenched on thin air. He slumped back into bed, his 
eyes on the dark doorway to the hospital wing as the 
footsteps drew nearer. 

Next moment, Dumbledore was backing into the 
dormitory, wearing a long woolly dressing gown and a 
nightcap. He was carrying one end of what looked like 
a statue. Professor McGonagall appeared a second 
later, carrying its feet. Together, they heaved it onto a 
bed. 

“Get Madam Pomfrey,” whispered Dumbledore, and 
Professor McGonagall hurried past the end of Harry’s 
bed out of sight. Harry lay quite still, pretending to be 
asleep. He heard urgent voices, and then Professor 
McGonagall swept back into view, closely followed by 
Madam Pomfrey, who was pulling a cardigan on over 
her nightdress. He heard a sharp intake of breath. 

“What happened?” Madam Pomfrey whispered to 
Dumbledore, bending over the statue on the bed. 

“Another attack,” said Dumbledore. “Minerva found 
him on the stairs.” 

“There was a bunch of grapes next to him,” said 
Professor McGonagall. “We think he was trying to 
sneak up here to visit Potter.” 

Harry’s stomach gave a horrible lurch. Slowly and 
carefully, he raised himself a few inches so he could 
look at the statue on the bed. A ray of moonlight lay 
across its staring face. 

Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




It was Colin Creevey. His eyes were wide and his 
hands were stuck up in front of him, holding his 
camera. 

“Petrified?” whispered Madam Pomfrey. 

“Yes,” said Professor McGonagall. “But I shudder to 
think ... If Albus hadn’t been on the way downstairs 
for hot chocolate — who knows what might have — ” 

The three of them stared down at Colin. Then 
Dumbledore leaned forward and wrenched the 
camera out of Colin’s rigid grip. 

“You don’t think he managed to get a picture of his 
attacker?” said Professor McGonagall eagerly. 

Dumbledore didn’t answer. He opened the back of the 
camera. 

“Good gracious!” said Madam Pomfrey. 

A jet of steam had hissed out of the camera. Harry, 
three beds away, caught the acrid smell of burnt 
plastic. 

“Melted,” said Madam Pomfrey wonderingly. “All 
melted ...” 

“What does this mean, Albus?” Professor McGonagall 
asked urgently. 

“It means,” said Dumbledore, “that the Chamber of 
Secrets is indeed open again.” 

Madam Pomfrey clapped a hand to her mouth. 
Professor McGonagall stared at Dumbledore. 

“But, Albus ... surely ... who?” 

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“The question is not who,” said Dumbledore, his eyes 
on Colin. “The question is, how. ...” 

And from what Harry could see of Professor 
McGonagall’s shadowy face, she didn’t understand 
this any better than he did. 



Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






THE DUELING CLUB 

Harry woke up on Sunday morning to find the 
dormitory blazing with winter sunlight and his arm 
reboned but very stiff. He sat up quickly and looked 
over at Colin’s bed, but it had been blocked from view 
by the high curtains Harry had changed behind 
yesterday. Seeing that he was awake, Madam Pomfrey 
came bustling over with a breakfast tray and then 
began bending and stretching his arm and fingers. 

“All in order,” she said as he clumsily fed himself 
porridge left-handed. “When you’ve finished eating, 
you may leave.” 

Harry dressed as quickly as he could and hurried off 
to Gryffindor Tower, desperate to tell Ron and 
Hermione about Colin and Dobby, but they weren’t 
there. Harry left to look for them, wondering where 
they could have got to and feeling slightly hurt that 
they weren’t interested in whether he had his bones 
back or not. 



Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



As Harry passed the library, Percy Weasley strolled 
out of it, looking in far better spirits than last time 
they’d met. 

“Oh, hello, Harry,” he said. “Excellent flying 
yesterday, really excellent. Gryffindor has just taken 
the lead for the House Cup — you earned fifty points!” 

“You haven’t seen Ron or Hermione, have you?” said 
Harry. 

“No, I haven’t,” said Percy, his smile fading. “I hope 
Ron’s not in another girls’ toilet ...” 

Harry forced a laugh, watched Percy walk out of sight, 
and then headed straight for Moaning Myrtle’s 
bathroom. He couldn’t see why Ron and Hermione 
would be in there again, but after making sure that 
neither Filch nor any prefects were around, he opened 
the door and heard their voices coming from a locked 
stall. 

“It’s me,” he said, closing the door behind him. There 
was a clunk, a splash, and a gasp from within the 
stall and he saw Hermione ’s eye peering through the 
keyhole. 

“Harry\” she said. “You gave us such a fright — come 
in — how’s your arm?” 

“Fine,” said Harry, squeezing into the stall. An old 
cauldron was perched on the toilet, and a crackling 
from under the rim told Harry they had lit a fire 
beneath it. Conjuring up portable, waterproof fires 
was a speciality of Hermione ’s. 

“We ’d’ve come to meet you, but we decided to get 
started on the Polyjuice Potion,” Ron explained as 



Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, with difficulty, locked the stall again. “We’ve 
decided this is the safest place to hide it.” 

Harry started to tell them about Colin, but Hermione 
interrupted. 

“We already know — we heard Professor McGonagall 
telling Professor Flitwick this morning. That’s why we 
decided we’d better get going — ” 

“The sooner we get a confession out of Malfoy, the 
better,” snarled Ron. “D’you know what I think? He 
was in such a foul temper after the Quidditch match, 
he took it out on Colin.” 

“There’s something else,” said Harry, watching 
Hermione tearing bundles of knotgrass and throwing 
them into the potion. “Dobby came to visit me in the 
middle of the night.” 

Ron and Hermione looked up, amazed. Harry told 
them everything Dobby had told him — or hadn’t told 
him. Hermione and Ron listened with their mouths 
open. 

“The Chamber of Secrets has been opened before?” 
Hermione said. 

“This settles it,” said Ron in a triumphant voice. 
“Lucius Malfoy must’ve opened the Chamber when he 
was at school here and now he’s told dear old Draco 
how to do it. It’s obvious. Wish Dobby ’d told you what 
kind of monster’s in there, though. I want to know 
how come nobody’s noticed it sneaking around the 
school.” 

“Maybe it can make itself invisible,” said Hermione, 
prodding leeches to the bottom of the cauldron. “Or 
maybe it can disguise itself — pretend to be a suit of 

Page | 205 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




armor or something — I’ve read about Chameleon 
Ghouls — ” 



“You read too much, Hermione,” said Ron, pouring 
dead lacewings on top of the leeches. He crumpled up 
the empty lacewing bag and looked at Harry. 

“So Dobby stopped us from getting on the train and 
broke your arm. ...” He shook his head. “You know 
what, Harry? If he doesn’t stop trying to save your life 
he’s going to kill you.” 



k k k 



The news that Colin Creevey had been attacked and 
was now lying as though dead in the hospital wing 
had spread through the entire school by Monday 
morning. The air was suddenly thick with rumor and 
suspicion. The first years were now moving around 
the castle in tight-knit groups, as though scared they 
would be attacked if they ventured forth alone. 

Ginny Weasley, who sat next to Colin Creevey in 
Charms, was distraught, but Harry felt that Fred and 
George were going the wrong way about cheering her 
up. They were taking turns covering themselves with 
fur or boils and jumping out at her from behind 
statues. They only stopped when Percy, apoplectic 
with rage, told them he was going to write to Mrs. 
Weasley and tell her Ginny was having nightmares. 

Meanwhile, hidden from the teachers, a roaring trade 
in talismans, amulets, and other protective devices 
was sweeping the school. Neville Longbottom bought 
a large, evil-smelling green onion, a pointed purple 
crystal, and a rotting newt tail before the other 
Gryffindor boys pointed out that he was in no danger; 



Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




he was a pureblood, and therefore unlikely to be 
attacked. 

“They went for Filch first,” Neville said, his round face 
fearful. “And everyone knows I’m almost a Squib.” 

In the second week of December Professor 
McGonagall came around as usual, collecting names 
of those who would be staying at school for 
Christmas. Harry, Ron, and Hermione signed her list; 
they had heard that Malfoy was staying, which struck 
them as very suspicious. The holidays would be the 
perfect time to use the Polyjuice Potion and try to 
worm a confession out of him. 

Unfortunately, the potion was only half finished. They 
still needed the bicorn horn and the boomslang skin, 
and the only place they were going to get them was 
from Snape’s private stores. Harry privately felt he’d 
rather face Slytherin’s legendary monster than let 
Snape catch him robbing his office. 

“What we need,” said Hermione briskly as Thursday 
afternoon’s double Potions lesson loomed nearer, “is a 
diversion. Then one of us can sneak into Snape’s 
office and take what we need.” 

Harry and Ron looked at her nervously. 

“I think I’d better do the actual stealing,” Hermione 
continued in a matter-of-fact tone. “You two will be 
expelled if you get into any more trouble, and I’ve got 
a clean record. So all you need to do is cause enough 
mayhem to keep Snape busy for five minutes or so.” 

Harry smiled feebly. Deliberately causing mayhem in 
Snape’s Potions class was about as safe as poking a 
sleeping dragon in the eye. 



Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Potions lessons took place in one of the large 
dungeons. Thursday afternoon’s lesson proceeded in 
the usual way. Twenty cauldrons stood steaming 
between the wooden desks, on which stood brass 
scales and jars of ingredients. Snape prowled through 
the fumes, making waspish remarks about the 
Gryffindors’ work while the Slytherins sniggered 
appreciatively. Draco Malfoy, who was Snape’s 
favorite student, kept flicking puffer-fish eyes at Ron 
and Harry, who knew that if they retaliated they 
would get detention faster than you could say 
“Unfair.” 

Harry’s Swelling Solution was far too runny, but he 
had his mind on more important things. He was 
waiting for Hermione’s signal, and he hardly listened 
as Snape paused to sneer at his watery potion. When 
Snape turned and walked off to bully Neville, 
Hermione caught Harry’s eye and nodded. 

Harry ducked swiftly down behind his cauldron, 
pulled one of Fred’s Filibuster fireworks out of his 
pocket, and gave it a quick prod with his wand. The 
firework began to fizz and sputter. Knowing he had 
only seconds, Harry straightened up, took aim, and 
lobbed it into the air; it landed right on target in 
Goyle’s cauldron. 

Goyle’s potion exploded, showering the whole class. 
People shrieked as splashes of the Swelling Solution 
hit them. Malfoy got a faceful and his nose began to 
swell like a balloon; Goyle blundered around, his 
hands over his eyes, which had expanded to the size 
of a dinner plate — Snape was trying to restore calm 
and find out what had happened. Through the 
confusion, Harry saw Hermione slip quietly into 
Snape’s office. 



Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Silence! SILENCE!” Snape roared. “Anyone who has 
been splashed, come here for a Deflating Draught — 
when I find out who did this — ” 

Harry tried not to laugh as he watched Malfoy hurry 
forward, his head drooping with the weight of a nose 
like a small melon. As half the class lumbered up to 
Snape ’s desk, some weighted down with arms like 
clubs, others unable to talk through gigantic puffed- 
up lips, Harry saw Hermione slide back into the 
dungeon, the front of her robes bulging. 

When everyone had taken a swig of antidote and the 
various swellings had subsided, Snape swept over to 
Goyle’s cauldron and scooped out the twisted black 
remains of the firework. There was a sudden hush. 

“If I ever find out who threw this,” Snape whispered, “I 
shall make sure that person is expelled.” 

Harry arranged his face into what he hoped was a 
puzzled expression. Snape was looking right at him, 
and the bell that rang ten minutes later could not 
have been more welcome. 

“He knew it was me,” Harry told Ron and Hermione as 
they hurried back to Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. “I 
could tell.” 

Hermione threw the new ingredients into the cauldron 
and began to stir feverishly. 

“It’ll be ready in two weeks,” she said happily. 

“Snape can’t prove it was you,” said Ron reassuringly 
to Harry. “What can he do?” 

“Knowing Snape, something foul,” said Harry as the 
potion frothed and bubbled. 

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




A week later, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were walking 
across the entrance hall when they saw a small knot 
of people gathered around the notice board, reading a 
piece of parchment that had just been pinned up. 
Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas beckoned them 
over, looking excited. 

“They’re starting a Dueling Club!” said Seamus. “First 
meeting tonight! I wouldn’t mind dueling lessons; 
they might come in handy one of these days. ...” 

“What, you reckon Slytherin’s monster can duel?” 
said Ron, but he, too, read the sign with interest. 

“Could be useful,” he said to Harry and Hermione as 
they went into dinner. “Shall we go?” 

Harry and Hermione were all for it, so at eight o’clock 
that evening they hurried back to the Great Hall. The 
long dining tables had vanished and a golden stage 
had appeared along one wall, lit by thousands of 
candles floating overhead. The ceiling was velvety 
black once more and most of the school seemed to be 
packed beneath it, all carrying their wands and 
looking excited. 

“I wonder who’ll be teaching us?” said Hermione as 
they edged into the chattering crowd. “Someone told 
me Flitwick was a dueling champion when he was 
young — maybe it’ll be him.” 

“As long as it’s not — ” Harry began, but he ended on 
a groan: Gilderoy Lockhart was walking onto the 
stage, resplendent in robes of deep plum and 
accompanied by none other than Snape, wearing his 
usual black. 



Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Lockhart waved an arm for silence and called, 

“Gather round, gather round! Can everyone see me? 
Can you all hear me? Excellent! 

“Now, Professor Dumbledore has granted me 
permission to start this little dueling club, to train 
you all in case you ever need to defend yourselves as I 
myself have done on countless occasions — for full 
details, see my published works. 

“Let me introduce my assistant, Professor Snape,” 
said Lockhart, flashing a wide smile. “He tells me he 
knows a tiny little bit about dueling himself and has 
sportingly agreed to help me with a short 
demonstration before we begin. Now, I don’t want any 
of you youngsters to worry — you’ll still have your 
Potions master when I’m through with him, never 
fear!” 

“Wouldn’t it be good if they finished each other off?” 
Ron muttered in Harry’s ear. 

Snape ’s upper lip was curling. Harry wondered why 
Lockhart was still smiling; if Snape had been looking 
at him like that he’d have been running as fast as he 
could in the opposite direction. 

Lockhart and Snape turned to face each other and 
bowed; at least, Lockhart did, with much twirling of 
his hands, whereas Snape jerked his head irritably. 
Then they raised their wands like swords in front of 
them. 

“As you see, we are holding our wands in the 
accepted combative position,” Lockhart told the silent 
crowd. “On the count of three, we will cast our first 
spells. Neither of us will be aiming to kill, of course.” 



Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I wouldn’t bet on that,” Harry murmured, watching 
Snape baring his teeth. 

“One — two — three — ” 

Both of them swung their wands above their heads 
and pointed them at their opponent; Snape cried: 

“ ExpelliarmusV’ There was a dazzling flash of scarlet 
light and Lockhart was blasted off his feet: He flew 
backward off the stage, smashed into the wall, and 
slid down it to sprawl on the floor. 

Malfoy and some of the other Slytherins cheered. 
Hermione was dancing on tiptoes. “Do you think he’s 
all right?” she squealed through her fingers. 

“Who cares?” said Harry and Ron together. 

Lockhart was getting unsteadily to his feet. His hat 
had fallen off and his wavy hair was standing on end. 

“Well, there you have it!” he said, tottering back onto 
the platform. “That was a Disarming Charm — as you 
see, I’ve lost my wand — ah, thank you, Miss Brown 
— yes, an excellent idea to show them that, Professor 
Snape, but if you don’t mind my saying so, it was very 
obvious what you were about to do. If I had wanted to 
stop you it would have been only too easy — however, 

I felt it would be instructive to let them see ...” 

Snape was looking murderous. Possibly Lockhart had 
noticed, because he said, “Enough demonstrating! I’m 
going to come amongst you now and put you all into 
pairs. Professor Snape, if you’d like to help me — ” 

They moved through the crowd, matching up 
partners. Lockhart teamed Neville with Justin Finch- 
Fletchley, but Snape reached Harry and Ron first. 



Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Time to split up the dream team, I think,” he 
sneered. “Weasley, you can partner Finnigan. Potter 



Harry moved automatically toward Hermione. 

“I don’t think so,” said Snape, smiling coldly. “Mr. 
Malfoy, come over here. Let’s see what you make of 
the famous Potter. And you, Miss Granger — you can 
partner Miss Bulstrode.” 

Malfoy strutted over, smirking. Behind him walked a 
Slytherin girl who reminded Harry of a picture he’d 
seen in Holidays with Hags. She was large and square 
and her heavy jaw jutted aggressively. Hermione gave 
her a weak smile that she did not return. 

“Face your partners!” called Lockhart, back on the 
platform. “And bow!” 

Harry and Malfoy barely inclined their heads, not 
taking their eyes off each other. 

“Wands at the ready!” shouted Lockhart. “When I 
count to three, cast your charms to disarm your 
opponents — only to disarm them — we don’t want 
any accidents — one . . . two . . . three — ” 

Harry swung his wand high, but Malfoy had already 
started on “two”: His spell hit Harry so hard he felt as 
though he’d been hit over the head with a saucepan. 
He stumbled, but everything still seemed to be 
working, and wasting no more time, Harry pointed his 
wand straight at Malfoy and shouted, “Rictusempral” 

A jet of silver light hit Malfoy in the stomach and he 
doubled up, wheezing. 



Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I said disarm only\” Lockhart shouted in alarm over 
the heads of the battling crowd, as Malfoy sank to his 
knees; Harry had hit him with a Tickling Charm, and 
he could barely move for laughing. Harry hung back, 
with a vague feeling it would be unsporting to bewitch 
Malfoy while he was on the floor, but this was a 
mistake; gasping for breath, Malfoy pointed his wand 
at Harry’s knees, choked, “Tarantallegral” and the 
next second Harry’s legs began to jerk around out of 
his control in a kind of quickstep. 

“Stop! Stop!” screamed Lockhart, but Snape took 
charge. 

“Finite Incantatem\” he shouted; Harry’s feet stopped 
dancing, Malfoy stopped laughing, and they were able 
to look up. 

A haze of greenish smoke was hovering over the 
scene. Both Neville and Justin were lying on the floor, 
panting; Ron was holding up an ashen-faced Seamus, 
apologizing for whatever his broken wand had done; 
but Hermione and Millicent Bulstrode were still 
moving; Millicent had Hermione in a headlock and 
Hermione was whimpering in pain; both their wands 
lay forgotten on the floor. Harry leapt forward and 
pulled Millicent off. It was difficult: She was a lot 
bigger than he was. 

“Dear, dear,” said Lockhart, skittering through the 
crowd, looking at the aftermath of the duels. “Up you 
go, Macmillan. ... Careful there, Miss Fawcett. ... 
Pinch it hard, it’ll stop bleeding in a second, Boot — 

“I think I’d better teach you how to block unfriendly 
spells,” said Lockhart, standing flustered in the midst 
of the hall. He glanced at Snape, whose black eyes 
glinted, and looked quickly away. “Let’s have a 



Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




volunteer pair — Longbottom and Finch-Fletchley, 
how about you — ” 

“A bad idea, Professor Lockhart,” said Snape, gliding 
over like a large and malevolent bat. “Longbottom 
causes devastation with the simplest spells. We’ll be 
sending what’s left of Finch-Fletchley up to the 
hospital wing in a matchbox.” Neville’s round, pink 
face went pinker. “How about Malfoy and Potter?” 
said Snape with a twisted smile. 

“Excellent idea!” said Lockhart, gesturing Harry and 
Malfoy into the middle of the hall as the crowd backed 
away to give them room. 

“Now, Harry,” said Lockhart. “When Draco points his 
wand at you, you do this.” 

He raised his own wand, attempted a complicated 
sort of wiggling action, and dropped it. Snape smirked 
as Lockhart quickly picked it up, saying, “Whoops — 
my wand is a little overexcited — ” 

Snape moved closer to Malfoy, bent down, and 
whispered something in his ear. Malfoy smirked, too. 
Harry looked up nervously at Lockhart and said, 
“Professor, could you show me that blocking thing 
again?” 

“Scared?” muttered Malfoy, so that Lockhart couldn’t 
hear him. 

“You wish,” said Harry out of the corner of his mouth. 

Lockhart cuffed Harry merrily on the shoulder. “Just 
do what I did, Harry!” 

“What, drop my wand?” 



Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




But Lockhart wasn’t listening. 

“Three — two — one — go!” he shouted. 

Malfoy raised his wand quickly and bellowed, 

“ Serpensortial” 

The end of his wand exploded. Harry watched, aghast, 
as a long black snake shot out of it, fell heavily onto 
the floor between them, and raised itself, ready to 
strike. There were screams as the crowd backed 
swiftly away, clearing the floor. 

“Don’t move, Potter,” said Snape lazily, clearly 
enjoying the sight of Harry standing motionless, eye 
to eye with the angry snake. “I’ll get rid of it. ...” 

“Allow me!” shouted Lockhart. He brandished his 
wand at the snake and there was a loud bang; the 
snake, instead of vanishing, flew ten feet into the air 
and fell back to the floor with a loud smack. Enraged, 
hissing furiously, it slithered straight toward Justin 
Finch-Fletchley and raised itself again, fangs exposed, 
poised to strike. 

Harry wasn’t sure what made him do it. He wasn’t 
even aware of deciding to do it. All he knew was that 
his legs were carrying him forward as though he was 
on casters and that he had shouted stupidly at the 
snake, “Leave him alone!” And miraculously — 
inexplicably — the snake slumped to the floor, docile 
as a thick, black garden hose, its eyes now on Harry. 
Harry felt the fear drain out of him. He knew the 
snake wouldn’t attack anyone now, though how he 
knew it, he couldn’t have explained. 

He looked up at Justin, grinning, expecting to see 
Justin looking relieved, or puzzled, or even grateful — 
but certainly not angry and scared. 

Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“What do you think you’re playing at?” he shouted, 
and before Harry could say anything, Justin had 
turned and stormed out of the hall. 

Snape stepped forward, waved his wand, and the 
snake vanished in a small puff of black smoke. 

Snape, too, was looking at Harry in an unexpected 
way: It was a shrewd and calculating look, and Harry 
didn’t like it. He was also dimly aware of an ominous 
muttering all around the walls. Then he felt a tugging 
on the back of his robes. 

“Come on,” said Ron’s voice in his ear. “Move — come 
on—” 



Ron steered him out of the hall, Hermione hurrying 
alongside them. As they went through the doors, the 
people on either side drew away as though they were 
frightened of catching something. Harry didn’t have a 
clue what was going on, and neither Ron nor 
Hermione explained anything until they had dragged 
him all the way up to the empty Gryffindor common 
room. Then Ron pushed Harry into an armchair and 
said, “You’re a Parselmouth. Why didn’t you tell us?” 

“I’m a what?” said Harry. 

“A Parselmouth .!” said Ron. “You can talk to snakes!” 

“I know,” said Harry. “I mean, that’s only the second 
time I’ve ever done it. I accidentally set a boa 
constrictor on my cousin Dudley at the zoo once — 
long story — but it was telling me it had never seen 
Brazil and I sort of set it free without meaning to — 
that was before I knew I was a wizard — ” 

“A boa constrictor told you it had never seen Brazil?” 
Ron repeated faintly. 



Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“So?” said Harry. “I bet loads of people here can do it.” 



“Oh, no they can’t,” said Ron. “It’s not a very common 
gift. Harry, this is bad.” 

“What’s bad?” said Harry, starting to feel quite angry. 
“What’s wrong with everyone? Listen, if I hadn’t told 
that snake not to attack Justin — ” 

“Oh, that’s what you said to it?” 

“What d’you mean? You were there — you heard me 



“I heard you speaking Parseltongue,” said Ron. 

“Snake language. You could have been saying 
anything — no wonder Justin panicked, you sounded 
like you were egging the snake on or something — it 
was creepy, you know — ” 

Harry gaped at him. 

“I spoke a different language? But — I didn’t realize — 
how can I speak a language without knowing I can 
speak it?” 

Ron shook his head. Both he and Hermione were 
looking as though someone had died. Harry couldn’t 
see what was so terrible. 

“D’you want to tell me what’s wrong with stopping a 
massive snake biting off Justin’s head?” he said. 
“What does it matter how I did it as long as Justin 
doesn’t have to join the Headless Hunt?” 

“It matters,” said Hermione, speaking at last in a 
hushed voice, “because being able to talk to snakes 
was what Salazar Slytherin was famous for. That’s 
why the symbol of Slytherin House is a serpent.” 

Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s mouth fell open. 



“Exactly,” said Ron. “And now the whole school’s 
going to think you’re his great-great-great-great- 
grandson or something — ” 

“But I’m not,” said Harry, with a panic he couldn’t 
quite explain. 

“You’ll find that hard to prove,” said Hermione. “He 
lived about a thousand years ago; for all we know, 
you could be.” 



•k k k 



Harry lay awake for hours that night. Through a gap 
in the curtains around his four-poster he watched 
snow starting to drift past the tower window and 
wondered ... 

Could he be a descendant of Salazar Slytherin? He 
didn’t know anything about his father’s family, after 
all. The Dursleys had always forbidden questions 
about his wizarding relatives. 

Quietly, Harry tried to say something in Parseltongue. 
The words wouldn’t come. It seemed he had to be 
face-to-face with a snake to do it. 

But I’m in Gryffindor, Harry thought. The Sorting Hat 
wouldn’t have put me in here if I had Slytherin blood. 



Ah, said a nasty little voice in his brain, but the 
Sorting Hat wanted to put you in Slytherin, don’t you 
remember? 

Harry turned over. He’d see Justin the next day in 
Herbology and he’d explain that he’d been calling the 

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




snake off, not egging it on, which (he thought angrily, 
pummeling his pillow) any fool should have realized. 

By next morning, however, the snow that had begun 
in the night had turned into a blizzard so thick that 
the last Herbology lesson of the term was canceled: 
Professor Sprout wanted to fit socks and scarves on 
the Mandrakes, a tricky operation she would entrust 
to no one else, now that it was so important for the 
Mandrakes to grow quickly and revive Mrs. Norris and 
Colin Creevey. 

Harry fretted about this next to the fire in the 
Gryffindor common room, while Ron and Hermione 
used their time off to play a game of wizard chess. 

“For heaven’s sake, Harry,” said Hermione, 
exasperated, as one of Ron’s bishops wrestled her 
knight off his horse and dragged him off the board. 

“Go and find Justin if it’s so important to you.” 

So Harry got up and left through the portrait hole, 
wondering where Justin might be. 

The castle was darker than it usually was in daytime 
because of the thick, swirling gray snow at every 
window. Shivering, Harry walked past classrooms 
where lessons were taking place, catching snatches of 
what was happening within. Professor McGonagall 
was shouting at someone who, by the sound of it, had 
turned his friend into a badger. Resisting the urge to 
take a look, Harry walked on by, thinking that Justin 
might be using his free time to catch up on some 
work, and deciding to check the library first. 

A group of the Hufflepuffs who should have been in 
Herbology were indeed sitting at the back of the 
library, but they didn’t seem to be working. Between 
the long lines of high bookshelves, Harry could see 

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




that their heads were close together and they were 
having what looked like an absorbing conversation. 
He couldn’t see whether Justin was among them. He 
was walking toward them when something of what 
they were saying met his ears, and he paused to 
listen, hidden in the Invisibility section. 

“So anyway,” a stout boy was saying, “I told Justin to 
hide up in our dormitory. I mean to say, if Potter’s 
marked him down as his next victim, it’s best if he 
keeps a low profile for a while. Of course, Justin’s 
been waiting for something like this to happen ever 
since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle-born. Justin 
actually told him he’d been down for Eton. That’s not 
the kind of thing you bandy about with Slytherin’s 
heir on the loose, is it?” 

“You definitely think it is Potter, then, Ernie?” said a 
girl with blonde pigtails anxiously. 

“Hannah,” said the stout boy solemnly, “he’s a 
Parselmouth. Everyone knows that’s the mark of a 
Dark wizard. Have you ever heard of a decent one 
who could talk to snakes? They called Slytherin 
himself Serpent-tongue.” 

There was some heavy murmuring at this, and Ernie 
went on, “Remember what was written on the wall? 
Enemies of the Heir, Beware. Potter had some sort of 
run-in with Filch. Next thing we know, Filch ’s cat’s 
attacked. That first year, Creevey, was annoying 
Potter at the Quidditch match, taking pictures of him 
while he was lying in the mud. Next thing we know — 
Creevey ’s been attacked.” 

“He always seems so nice, though,” said Hannah 
uncertainly, “and, well, he’s the one who made You- 
Know-Who disappear. He can’t be all bad, can he?” 



Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ernie lowered his voice mysteriously, the Hufflepuffs 
bent closer, and Harry edged nearer so that he could 
catch Ernie’s words. 

“No one knows how he survived that attack by You- 
Know-Who. I mean to say, he was only a baby when it 
happened. He should have been blasted into 
smithereens. Only a really powerful Dark wizard 
could have survived a curse like that.” He dropped his 
voice until it was barely more than a whisper, and 
said, “ That’s probably why You-Know-Who wanted to 
kill him in the first place. Didn’t want another Dark 
Lord competing with him. I wonder what other powers 
Potter’s been hiding?” 

Harry couldn’t take anymore. Clearing his throat 
loudly, he stepped out from behind the bookshelves. 

If he hadn’t been feeling so angry, he would have 
found the sight that greeted him funny: Every one of 
the Hufflepuffs looked as though they had been 
Petrified by the sight of him, and the color was 
draining out of Ernie’s face. 

“Hello,” said Harry. “I’m looking for Justin Finch- 
Fletchley.” 

The Hufflepuffs’ worst fears had clearly been 
confirmed. They all looked fearfully at Ernie. 

“What do you want with him?” said Ernie in a 
quavering voice. 

“I wanted to tell him what really happened with that 
snake at the Dueling Club,” said Harry. 

Ernie bit his white lips and then, taking a deep 
breath, said, “We were all there. We saw what 
happened.” 



Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Then you noticed that after I spoke to it, the snake 
backed off?” said Harry. 

“All I saw,” said Ernie stubbornly, though he was 
trembling as he spoke, “was you speaking 
Parseltongue and chasing the snake toward Justin.” 

“I didn’t chase it at him!” Harry said, his voice 
shaking with anger. “It didn’t even touch him!” 

“It was a very near miss,” said Ernie. “And in case 
you’re getting ideas,” he added hastily, “I might tell 
you that you can trace my family back through nine 
generations of witches and warlocks and my blood’s 
as pure as anyone’s, so — ” 

“I don’t care what sort of blood you’ve got!” said Harry 
fiercely. “Why would I want to attack Muggle-borns?” 

“I’ve heard you hate those Muggles you live with,” said 
Ernie swiftly. 

“It’s not possible to live with the Dursleys and not 
hate them,” said Harry. “I’d like to see you try it.” 

He turned on his heel and stormed out of the library, 
earning himself a reproving glare from Madam Pince, 
who was polishing the gilded cover of a large 
spellbook. 

Harry blundered up the corridor, barely noticing 
where he was going, he was in such a fury. The result 
was that he walked into something very large and 
solid, which knocked him backward onto the floor. 

“Oh, hello, Hagrid,” Harry said, looking up. 

Hagrid’s face was entirely hidden by a woolly, snow- 
covered balaclava, but it couldn’t possibly be anyone 

Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




else, as he filled most of the corridor in his moleskin 
overcoat. A dead rooster was hanging from one of his 
massive, gloved hands. 

“All righ’, Harry?” he said, pulling up the balaclava so 
he could speak. “Why aren’t yeh in class?” 

“Canceled,” said Harry, getting up. “What’re you doing 
in here?” 

Hagrid held up the limp rooster. 

“Second one killed this term,” he explained. “It’s 
either foxes or a Blood-Suckin’ Bugbear, an’ I need 
the headmaster’s permission ter put a charm around 
the hen coop.” 

He peered more closely at Harry from under his thick, 
snow-flecked eyebrows. 

“Yeh sure yeh’re all righ’? Yeh look all hot an’ 
bothered — ” 

Harry couldn’t bring himself to repeat what Ernie and 
the rest of the Hufflepuffs had been saying about him. 

“It’s nothing,” he said. “I’d better get going, Hagrid, it’s 
Transfiguration next and I’ve got to pick up my 
books.” 

He walked off, his mind still full of what Ernie had 
said about him. 

“Justin’s been waiting for something like this to 
happen ever since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle- 
born. ...” 

Harry stamped up the stairs and turned along 
another corridor, which was particularly dark; the 

Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




torches had been extinguished by a strong, icy draft 
that was blowing through a loose windowpane. He 
was halfway down the passage when he tripped 
headlong over something lying on the floor. 

He turned to squint at what he’d fallen over and felt 
as though his stomach had dissolved. 

Justin Finch-Fletchley was lying on the floor, rigid 
and cold, a look of shock frozen on his face, his eyes 
staring blankly at the ceiling. And that wasn’t all. 

Next to him was another figure, the strangest sight 
Harry had ever seen. 

It was Nearly Headless Nick, no longer pearly-white 
and transparent, but black and smoky, floating 
immobile and horizontal, six inches off the floor. His 
head was half off and his face wore an expression of 
shock identical to Justin’s. 

Harry got to his feet, his breathing fast and shallow, 
his heart doing a kind of drumroll against his ribs. He 
looked wildly up and down the deserted corridor and 
saw a line of spiders scuttling as fast as they could 
away from the bodies. The only sounds were the 
muffled voices of teachers from the classes on either 
side. 

He could run, and no one would ever know he had 
been there. But he couldn’t just leave them lying 
here. ... He had to get help. ... Would anyone believe 
he hadn’t had anything to do with this? 

As he stood there, panicking, a door right next to him 
opened with a bang. Peeves the Poltergeist came 
shooting out. 



Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Why, it’s potty wee Potter!” cackled Peeves, knocking 
Harry’s glasses askew as he bounced past him. 
“What’s Potter up to? Why’s Potter lurking — ” 

Peeves stopped, halfway through a midair somersault. 
Upside down, he spotted Justin and Nearly Headless 
Nick. He flipped the right way up, filled his lungs and, 
before Harry could stop him, screamed, “ATTACK! 
ATTACK! ANOTHER ATTACK! NO MORTAL OR 
GHOST IS SAFE! RUN FOR YOUR LIVES! 
ATTAAAACK!” 

Crash — crash — crash — door after door flew open 
along the corridor and people flooded out. For several 
long minutes, there was a scene of such confusion 
that Justin was in danger of being squashed and 
people kept standing in Nearly Headless Nick. Harry 
found himself pinned against the wall as the teachers 
shouted for quiet. Professor McGonagall came 
running, followed by her own class, one of whom still 
had black-and-white- striped hair. She used her wand 
to set off a loud bang, which restored silence, and 
ordered everyone back into their classes. No sooner 
had the scene cleared somewhat than Ernie the 
Hufflepuff arrived, panting, on the scene. 

“ Caught in the act!” Ernie yelled, his face stark white, 
pointing his finger dramatically at Harry. 

“That will do, Macmillan!” said Professor McGonagall 
sharply. 

Peeves was bobbing overhead, now grinning wickedly, 
surveying the scene; Peeves always loved chaos. As 
the teachers bent over Justin and Nearly Headless 
Nick, examining them, Peeves broke into song: 

“Oh, Potter, you rotter, oh, what have you done, 



Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




You’re killing off students, you think it’s good fun — ” 



“That’s enough, Peeves!” barked Professor 
McGonagall, and Peeves zoomed away backward, with 
his tongue out at Harry. 

Justin was carried up to the hospital wing by 
Professor Flitwick and Professor Sinistra of the 
Astronomy department, but nobody seemed to know 
what to do for Nearly Headless Nick. In the end, 
Professor McGonagall conjured a large fan out of thin 
air, which she gave to Ernie with instructions to waft 
Nearly Headless Nick up the stairs. This Ernie did, 
fanning Nick along like a silent black hovercraft. This 
left Harry and Professor McGonagall alone together. 

“This way, Potter,” she said. 

“Professor,” said Harry at once, “I swear I didn’t — ” 

“This is out of my hands, Potter,” said Professor 
McGonagall curtly. 

They marched in silence around a corner and she 
stopped before a large and extremely ugly stone 
gargoyle. 

“Lemon drop!” she said. This was evidently a 
password, because the gargoyle sprang suddenly to 
life and hopped aside as the wall behind him split in 
two. Even full of dread for what was coming, Harry 
couldn’t fail to be amazed. Behind the wall was a 
spiral staircase that was moving smoothly upward, 
like an escalator. As he and Professor McGonagall 
stepped onto it, Harry heard the wall thud closed 
behind them. They rose upward in circles, higher and 
higher, until at last, slightly dizzy, Harry saw a 
gleaming oak door ahead, with a brass knocker in the 
shape of a griffin. 

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




He knew now where he was being taken. This must be 
where Dumbledore lived. 



Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 





THE POLY JUICE POTION 

They stepped off the stone staircase at the top, and 
Professor McGonagall rapped on the door. It opened 
silently and they entered. Professor McGonagall told 
Harry to wait and left him there, alone. 

Harry looked around. One thing was certain: of all the 
teachers’ offices Harry had visited so far this year, 
Dumbledore’s was by far the most interesting. If he 
hadn’t been scared out of his wits that he was about 
to be thrown out of school, he would have been very 
pleased to have a chance to look around it. 

It was a large and beautiful circular room, full of 
funny little noises. A number of curious silver 
instruments stood on spindle-legged tables, whirring 
and emitting little puffs of smoke. The walls were 
covered with portraits of old headmasters and 
headmistresses, all of whom were snoozing gently in 
their frames. There was also an enormous, claw- 
footed desk, and, sitting on a shelf behind it, a 
shabby, tattered wizard’s hat — the Sorting Hat 



Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



Harry hesitated. He cast a wary eye around the 
sleeping witches and wizards on the walls. Surely it 
couldn’t hurt if he took the hat down and tried it on 
again? Just to see ... just to make sure it had put him 
in the right House — 

He walked quietly around the desk, lifted the hat from 
its shelf, and lowered it slowly onto his head. It was 
much too large and slipped down over his eyes, just 
as it had done the last time he’d put it on. Harry 
stared at the black inside of the hat, waiting. Then a 
small voice said in his ear, “Bee in your bonnet, Harry 
Potter?” 

“Er, yes,” Harry muttered. “Er — sorry to bother you 
— I wanted to ask — ” 

“You’ve been wondering whether I put you in the right 
House,” said the hat smartly. “Yes ... you were 
particularly difficult to place. But I stand by what I 
said before” — Harry’s heart leapt — “you would have 
done well in Slytherin — ” 

Harry’s stomach plummeted. He grabbed the point of 
the hat and pulled it off. It hung limply in his hand, 
grubby and faded. Harry pushed it back onto its 
shelf, feeling sick. 

“You’re wrong,” he said aloud to the still and silent 
hat. It didn’t move. Harry backed away, watching it. 
Then a strange, gagging noise behind him made him 
wheel around. 

He wasn’t alone after all. Standing on a golden perch 
behind the door was a decrepit-looking bird that 
resembled a half-plucked turkey. Harry stared at it 
and the bird looked balefully back, making its gagging 
noise again. Harry thought it looked very ill. Its eyes 



Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




were dull and, even as Harry watched, a couple more 
feathers fell out of its tail. 

Harry was just thinking that all he needed was for 
Dumbledore ’s pet bird to die while he was alone in 
the office with it, when the bird burst into flames. 

Harry yelled in shock and backed away into the desk. 
He looked feverishly around in case there was a glass 
of water somewhere but couldn’t see one; the bird, 
meanwhile, had become a fireball; it gave one loud 
shriek and next second there was nothing but a 
smoldering pile of ash on the floor. 

The office door opened. Dumbledore came in, looking 
very somber. 

“Professor,” Harry gasped. “Your bird — I couldn’t do 
anything — he just caught fire — ” 

To Harry’s astonishment, Dumbledore smiled. 

“About time, too,” he said. “He’s been looking dreadful 
for days; I’ve been telling him to get a move on.” 

He chuckled at the stunned look on Harry’s face. 

“Fawkes is a phoenix, Harry. Phoenixes burst into 
flame when it is time for them to die and are reborn 
from the ashes. Watch him ...” 

Harry looked down in time to see a tiny, wrinkled, 
newborn bird poke its head out of the ashes. It was 
quite as ugly as the old one. 

“It’s a shame you had to see him on a Burning Day,” 
said Dumbledore, seating himself behind his desk. 
“He’s really very handsome most of the time, 
wonderful red and gold plumage. Fascinating 

Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




creatures, phoenixes. They can carry immensely 
heavy loads, their tears have healing powers, and 
they make highly faithful pets.” 

In the shock of Fawkes catching fire, Harry had 
forgotten what he was there for, but it all came back 
to him as Dumbledore settled himself in the high 
chair behind the desk and fixed Harry with his 
penetrating, light-blue stare. 

Before Dumbledore could speak another word, 
however, the door of the office flew open with an 
almighty bang and Hagrid burst in, a wild look in his 
eyes, his balaclava perched on top of his shaggy black 
head and the dead rooster still swinging from his 
hand. 

“It wasn’ Harry, Professor Dumbledore!” said Hagrid 
urgently. “I was talkin’ ter him seconds before that 
kid was found, he never had time, sir — ” 

Dumbledore tried to say something, but Hagrid went 
ranting on, waving the rooster around in his 
agitation, sending feathers everywhere. 

“ — it can’t’ve bin him, I’ll swear it in front o’ the 
Ministry o’ Magic if I have to — ” 

“Hagrid, I — ” 

“ — yeh’ve got the wrong boy, sir, I know Harry never 



“Hagridl” said Dumbledore loudly. “I do not think that 
Harry attacked those people.” 

“Oh,” said Hagrid, the rooster falling limply at his 
side. “Right. I’ll wait outside then, Headmaster.” 



Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




And he stomped out looking embarrassed. 

“You don’t think it was me, Professor?” Harry 
repeated hopefully as Dumbledore brushed rooster 
feathers off his desk. 

“No, Harry, I don’t,” said Dumbledore, though his face 
was somber again. “But I still want to talk to you.” 

Harry waited nervously while Dumbledore considered 
him, the tips of his long fingers together. 

“I must ask you, Harry, whether there is anything 
you’d like to tell me,” he said gently. “Anything at all.” 

Harry didn’t know what to say. He thought of Malfoy 
shouting, “You’ll be next, Mudbloods!” and of the 
Polyjuice Potion simmering away in Moaning Myrtle’s 
bathroom. Then he thought of the disembodied voice 
he had heard twice and remembered what Ron had 
said: “ Hearing voices no one else can hear isn’t a good 
sign, even in the wizarding world.” He thought, too, 
about what everyone was saying about him, and his 
growing dread that he was somehow connected with 
Salazar Slytherin. ... 

“No,” said Harry. “There isn’t anything, Professor. ...” 

The double attack on Justin and Nearly Headless 
Nick turned what had hitherto been nervousness into 
real panic. Curiously, it was Nearly Headless Nick’s 
fate that seemed to worry people most. What could 
possibly do that to a ghost? people asked each other; 
what terrible power could harm someone who was 
already dead? There was almost a stampede to book 
seats on the Hogwarts Express so that students could 
go home for Christmas. 



Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“At this rate, well be the only ones left,” Ron told 
Harry and Hermione. “Us, Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle. 
What a jolly holiday it’s going to be.” 

Crabbe and Goyle, who always did whatever Malfoy 
did, had signed up to stay over the holidays, too. But 
Harry was glad that most people were leaving. He was 
tired of people skirting around him in the corridors, 
as though he were about to sprout fangs or spit 
poison; tired of all the muttering, pointing, and 
hissing as he passed. 

Fred and George, however, found all this very funny. 
They went out of their way to march ahead of Harry 
down the corridors, shouting, “Make way for the Heir 
of Slytherin, seriously evil wizard coming through. ...” 

Percy was deeply disapproving of this behavior. 

“It is not a laughing matter,” he said coldly. 

“Oh, get out of the way, Percy,” said Fred. “Harry’s in 
a hurry.” 

“Yeah, he’s off to the Chamber of Secrets for a cup of 
tea with his fanged servant,” said George, chortling. 

Ginny didn’t find it amusing either. 

“Oh, don’t,” she wailed every time Fred asked Harry 
loudly who he was planning to attack next, or when 
George pretended to ward Harry off with a large clove 
of garlic when they met. 

Harry didn’t mind; it made him feel better that Fred 
and George, at least, thought the idea of his being 
Slytherin ’s heir was quite ludicrous. But their antics 
seemed to be aggravating Draco Malfoy, who looked 
increasingly sour each time he saw them at it. 

Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s because he’s bursting to say it’s really him,” said 
Ron knowingly. “You know how he hates anyone 
beating him at anything, and you’re getting all the 
credit for his dirty work.” 

“Not for long,” said Hermione in a satisfied tone. “The 
Polyjuice Potion’s nearly ready. We’ll be getting the 
truth out of him any day now.” 

At last the term ended, and a silence deep as the 
snow on the grounds descended on the castle. Harry 
found it peaceful, rather than gloomy, and enjoyed 
the fact that he, Hermione, and the Weasleys had the 
run of Gryffindor Tower, which meant they could play 
Exploding Snap loudly without bothering anyone, and 
practice dueling in private. Fred, George, and Ginny 
had chosen to stay at school rather than visit Bill in 
Egypt with Mr. and Mrs. Weasley. Percy, who 
disapproved of what he termed their childish 
behavior, didn’t spend much time in the Gryffindor 
common room. He had already told them pompously 
that he was only staying over Christmas because it 
was his duty as a prefect to support the teachers 
during this troubled time. 

Christmas morning dawned, cold and white. Harry 
and Ron, the only ones left in their dormitory, were 
woken very early by Hermione, who burst in, fully 
dressed and carrying presents for them both. 

“Wake up,” she said loudly, pulling back the curtains 
at the window. 

“Hermione — you’re not supposed to be in here — ” 
said Ron, shielding his eyes against the light. 

“Merry Christmas to you, too,” said Hermione, 
throwing him his present. “I’ve been up for nearly an 



Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




hour, adding more lace-wings to the potion. It’s 
ready.” 

Harry sat up, suddenly wide awake. 

“Are you sure?” 

“Positive,” said Hermione, shirting Scabbers the rat so 
that she could sit down on the end of Ron’s four- 
poster. “If we’re going to do it, I say it should be 
tonight.” 

At that moment, Hedwig swooped into the room, 
carrying a very small package in her beak. 

“Hello,” said Harry happily as she landed on his bed. 
“Are you speaking to me again?” 

She nibbled his ear in an affectionate sort of way, 
which was a far better present than the one that she 
had brought him, which turned out to be from the 
Dursleys. They had sent Harry a toothpick and a note 
telling him to find out whether he’d be able to stay at 
Hogwarts for the summer vacation, too. 

The rest of Harry’s Christmas presents were far more 
satisfactory. Hagrid had sent him a large tin of treacle 
toffee, which Harry decided to soften by the fire before 
eating; Ron had given him a book called Flying with 
the Cannons, a book of interesting facts about his 
favorite Quidditch team, and Hermione had bought 
him a luxury eagle-feather quill. Harry opened the 
last present to find a new, hand-knitted sweater from 
Mrs. Weasley and a large plum cake. He read her card 
with a fresh surge of guilt, thinking about Mr. 
Weasley’s car (which hadn’t been seen since its crash 
with the Whomping Willow), and the bout of rule- 
breaking he and Ron were planning next. 



Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




No one, not even someone dreading taking Polyjuice 
Potion later, could fail to enjoy Christmas dinner at 
Hogwarts. 

The Great Hall looked magnificent. Not only were 
there a dozen frost-covered Christmas trees and thick 
streamers of holly and mistletoe crisscrossing the 
ceiling, but enchanted snow was falling, warm and 
dry, from the ceiling. Dumbledore led them in a few of 
his favorite carols, Hagrid booming more and more 
loudly with every goblet of eggnog he consumed. 

Percy, who hadn’t noticed that Fred had bewitched 
his prefect badge so that it now read “Pin-head,” kept 
asking them all what they were sniggering at. Harry 
didn’t even care that Draco Malfoy was making loud, 
snide remarks about his new sweater from the 
Slytherin table. With a bit of luck, Malfoy would be 
getting his comeuppance in a few hours’ time. 

Harry and Ron had barely finished their third 
helpings of Christmas pudding when Hermione 
ushered them out of the hall to finalize their plans for 
the evening. 

“We still need a bit of the people you’re changing 
into,” said Hermione matter-of-factly, as though she 
were sending them to the supermarket for laundry 
detergent. “And obviously, it’ll be best if you can get 
something of Crabbe’s and Goyle’s; they’re Malfoy’s 
best friends, he’ll tell them anything. And we also 
need to make sure the real Crabbe and Goyle can’t 
burst in on us while we’re interrogating him. 

“I’ve got it all worked out,” she went on smoothly, 
ignoring Harry’s and Ron’s stupefied faces. She held 
up two plump chocolate cakes. “I’ve filled these with a 
simple Sleeping Draught. All you have to do is make 
sure Crabbe and Goyle find them. You know how 
greedy they are, they’re bound to eat them. Once 
Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




they’re asleep, pull out a few of their hairs and hide 
them in a broom closet.” 

Harry and Ron looked incredulously at each other. 

“Hermione, I don’t think — ” 

“That could go seriously wrong — ” 

But Hermione had a steely glint in her eye not unlike 
the one Professor McGonagall sometimes had. 

“The potion will be useless without Crabbe’s and 
Goyle’s hair,” she said sternly. “You do want to 
investigate Malfoy, don’t you?” 

“Oh, all right, all right,” said Harry. “But what about 
you? Whose hair are you ripping out?” 

“I’ve already got mine!” said Hermione brightly, 
pulling a tiny bottle out of her pocket and showing 
them the single hair inside it. “Remember Millicent 
Bulstrode wrestling with me at the Dueling Club? She 
left this on my robes when she was trying to strangle 
me! And she’s gone home for Christmas — so I’ll just 
have to tell the Slytherins I’ve decided to come back.” 

When Hermione had bustled off to check on the 
Polyjuice Potion again, Ron turned to Harry with a 
doom-laden expression. 

“Have you ever heard of a plan where so many things 
could go wrong?” 

But to Harry’s and Ron’s utter amazement, stage one 
of the operation went just as smoothly as Hermione 
had said. They lurked in the deserted entrance hall 
after Christmas tea, waiting for Crabbe and Goyle 
who had remained alone at the Slytherin table, 

Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




shoveling down fourth helpings of trifle. Harry had 
perched the chocolate cakes on the end of the 
banisters. When they spotted Crabbe and Goyle 
coming out of the Great Hall, Harry and Ron hid 
quickly behind a suit of armor next to the front door. 

“How thick can you get?” Ron whispered ecstatically 
as Crabbe gleefully pointed out the cakes to Goyle 
and grabbed them. Grinning stupidly, they stuffed the 
cakes whole into their large mouths. For a moment, 
both of them chewed greedily, looks of triumph on 
their faces. Then, without the smallest change of 
expression, they both keeled over backward onto the 
floor. 

By far the hardest part was hiding them in the closet 
across the hall. Once they were safely stowed among 
the buckets and mops, Harry yanked out a couple of 
the bristles that covered Goyle ’s forehead and Ron 
pulled out several of Crabbe ’s hairs. They also stole 
their shoes, because their own were far too small for 
Crabbe- and Goyle-size feet. Then, still stunned at 
what they had just done, they sprinted up to Moaning 
Myrtle’s bathroom. 

They could hardly see for the thick black smoke 
issuing from the stall in which Hermione was stirring 
the cauldron. Pulling their robes up over their faces, 
Harry and Ron knocked softly on the door. 

“Hermione?” 

They heard the scrape of the lock and Hermione 
emerged, shiny-faced and looking anxious. Behind 
her they heard the gloop gloop of the bubbling, 
glutinous potion. Three glass tumblers stood ready on 
the toilet seat. 

“Did you get them?” Hermione asked breathlessly. 

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry showed her Goyle’s hair. 



“Good. And I sneaked these spare robes out of the 
laundry,” Hermione said, holding up a small sack. 
“You’ll need bigger sizes once you’re Crabbe and 
Goyle.” 

The three of them stared into the cauldron. Close up, 
the potion looked like thick, dark mud, bubbling 
sluggishly. 

“I’m sure I’ve done everything right,” said Hermione, 
nervously rereading the splotched page of Moste 
Potente Potions. “It looks like the book says it should 
... once we’ve drunk it, we’ll have exactly an hour 
before we change back into ourselves.” 

“Now what?” Ron whispered. 

“We separate it into three glasses and add the hairs.” 

Hermione ladled large dollops of the potion into each 
of the glasses. Then, her hand trembling, she shook 
Millicent Bulstrode’s hair out of its bottle into the first 
glass. 

The potion hissed loudly like a boiling kettle and 
frothed madly. A second later, it had turned a sick 
sort of yellow. 

“Urgh — essence of Millicent Bulstrode,” said Ron, 
eyeing it with loathing. “Bet it tastes disgusting.” 

“Add yours, then,” said Hermione. 

Harry dropped Goyle’s hair into the middle glass and 
Ron put Crabbe’s into the last one. Both glasses 
hissed and frothed: Goyle’s turned the khaki color of 
a booger, Crabbe’s a dark, murky brown. 

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Hang on,” said Harry as Ron and Hermione reached 
for their glasses. “We’d better not all drink them in 
here. ... Once we turn into Crabbe and Goyle we won’t 
fit. And Millicent Bulstrode’s no pixie.” 

“Good thinking,” said Ron, unlocking the door. “We’ll 
take separate stalls.” 

Careful not to spill a drop of his Polyjuice Potion, 
Harry slipped into the middle stall. 

“Ready?” he called. 

“Ready,” came Ron’s and Hermione’s voices. 

“One — two — three — ” 

Pinching his nose, Harry drank the potion down in 
two large gulps. It tasted like overcooked cabbage. 

Immediately, his insides started writhing as though 
he’d just swallowed live snakes — doubled up, he 
wondered whether he was going to be sick — then a 
burning sensation spread rapidly from his stomach to 
the very ends of his fingers and toes — next, bringing 
him gasping to all fours, came a horrible melting 
feeling, as the skin all over his body bubbled like hot 
wax — and before his eyes, his hands began to grow, 
the fingers thickened, the nails broadened, the 
knuckles were bulging like bolts — his shoulders 
stretched painfully and a prickling on his forehead 
told him that hair was creeping down toward his 
eyebrows — his robes ripped as his chest expanded 
like a barrel bursting its hoops — his feet were agony 
in shoes four sizes too small — 

As suddenly as it had started, everything stopped. 
Harry lay facedown on the stone-cold floor, listening 
to Myrtle gurgling morosely in the end toilet. With 

Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




difficulty, he kicked off his shoes and stood up. So 
this was what it felt like, being Goyle. His large hand 
trembling, he pulled off his old robes, which were 
hanging a foot above his ankles, pulled on the spare 
ones, and laced up Goyle’s boatlike shoes. He reached 
up to brush his hair out of his eyes and met only the 
short growth of wiry bristles, low on his forehead. 
Then he realized that his glasses were clouding his 
eyes because Goyle obviously didn’t need them — he 
took them off and called, “Are you two okay?” Goyle’s 
low rasp of a voice issued from his mouth. 

“Yeah,” came the deep grunt of Crabbe from his right. 

Harry unlocked his door and stepped in front of the 
cracked mirror. Goyle stared back at him out of dull, 
deepset eyes. Harry scratched his ear. So did Goyle. 

Ron’s door opened. They stared at each other. Except 
that he looked pale and shocked, Ron was 
indistinguishable from Crabbe, from the pudding- 
bowl haircut to the long, gorilla arms. 

“This is unbelievable,” said Ron, approaching the 
mirror and prodding Crabbe ’s flat nose. 

“Unbelievable.” 

“We’d better get going,” said Harry, loosening the 
watch that was cutting into Goyle’s thick wrist. “We’ve 
still got to find out where the Slytherin common room 
is. I only hope we can find someone to follow ...” 

Ron, who had been gazing at Harry, said, “You don’t 
know how bizarre it is to see Goyle thinking.” He 
banged on Hermione’s door. “C’mon, we need to go — ” 

A high-pitched voice answered him. 



Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I — I don’t think I’m going to come after all. You go 
on without me.” 

“Hermione, we know Millicent Bulstrode’s ugly, no 
one’s going to know it’s you — ” 

“No — really — I don’t think I’ll come. You two hurry 
up, you’re wasting time — ” 

Harry looked at Ron, bewildered. 

“That looks more like Goyle,” said Ron. “That’s how he 
looks every time a teacher asks him a question.” 

“Hermione, are you okay?” said Harry through the 
door. 

“Fine — I’m fine — go on — ” 

Harry looked at his watch. Five of their precious sixty 
minutes had already passed. 

“Well meet you back here, all right?” he said. 

Harry and Ron opened the door of the bathroom 
carefully, checked that the coast was clear, and set 
off. 

“Don’t swing your arms like that,” Harry muttered to 
Ron. 

“Eh?” 

“Crabbe holds them sort of stiff. ...” 

“How’s this?” 

“Yeah, that’s better. ...” 



Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




They went down the marble staircase. All they needed 
now was a Slytherin that they could follow to the 
Slytherin common room, but there was nobody 
around. 

“Any ideas?” muttered Harry. 

“The Slytherins always come up to breakfast from 
over there,” said Ron, nodding at the entrance to the 
dungeons. The words had barely left his mouth when 
a girl with long, curly hair emerged from the entrance. 

“Excuse me,” said Ron, hurrying up to her. “We’ve 
forgotten the way to our common room.” 

“I beg your pardon?” said the girl stiffly. “Our common 
room? I’m a Ravenclaw.” 

She walked away, looking suspiciously back at them. 

Harry and Ron hurried down the stone steps into the 
darkness, their footsteps echoing particularly loudly 
as Crabbe’s and Goyle’s huge feet hit the floor, feeling 
that this wasn’t going to be as easy as they had 
hoped. 

The labyrinthine passages were deserted. They walked 
deeper and deeper under the school, constantly 
checking their watches to see how much time they 
had left. After a quarter of an hour, just when they 
were getting desperate, they heard a sudden 
movement ahead. 

“Ha!” said Ron excitedly. “There’s one of them now!” 

The figure was emerging from a side room. As they 
hurried nearer, however, their hearts sank. It wasn’t a 
Slytherin, it was Percy. 



Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“What’re you doing down here?” said Ron in surprise. 
Percy looked affronted. 

“That,” he said stiffly, “is none of your business. It’s 
Crabbe, isn’t it?” 

“Wh — oh, yeah,” said Ron. 

“Well, get off to your dormitories,” said Percy sternly. 
“It’s not safe to go wandering around dark corridors 
these days.” 

“You are,” Ron pointed out. 

“I,” said Percy, drawing himself up, “am a prefect. 
Nothing’s about to attack me.” 

A voice suddenly echoed behind Harry and Ron. 

Draco Malfoy was strolling toward them, and for the 
first time in his life, Harry was pleased to see him. 

“There you are,” he drawled, looking at them. “Have 
you two been pigging out in the Great Hall all this 
time? I’ve been looking for you; I want to show you 
something really funny.” 

Malfoy glanced witheringly at Percy. 

“And what’re you doing down here, Weasley?” he 
sneered. 

Percy looked outraged. 

“You want to show a bit more respect to a school 
prefect!” he said. “I don’t like your attitude!” 

Malfoy sneered and motioned for Harry and Ron to 
follow him. Harry almost said something apologetic to 

Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Percy but caught himself just in time. He and Ron 
hurried after Malfoy, who said as they turned into the 
next passage, “That Peter Weasley — ” 

“Percy,” Ron corrected him automatically. 

“Whatever,” said Malfoy. “I’ve noticed him sneaking 
around a lot lately. And I bet I know what he’s up to. 
He thinks he’s going to catch Slytherin’s heir single- 
handed.” 

He gave a short, derisive laugh. Harry and Ron 
exchanged excited looks. 

Malfoy paused by a stretch of bare, damp stone wall. 
“What’s the new password again?” he said to Harry. 
“Er — ” said Harry. 

“Oh, yeah — pure-blood\” said Malfoy, not listening, 
and a stone door concealed in the wall slid open. 
Malfoy marched through it, and Harry and Ron 
followed him. 

The Slytherin common room was a long, low 
underground room with rough stone walls and ceiling 
from which round, greenish lamps were hanging on 
chains. A fire was crackling under an elaborately 
carved mantelpiece ahead of them, and several 
Slytherins were silhouetted around it in high-backed 
chairs. 

“Wait here,” said Malfoy to Harry and Ron, motioning 
them to a pair of empty chairs set back from the fire. 
“I’ll go and get it — my father’s just sent it to me — ” 



Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Wondering what Malfoy was going to show them, 
Harry and Ron sat down, doing their best to look at 
home. 

Malfoy came back a minute later, holding what looked 
like a newspaper clipping. He thrust it under Ron’s 
nose. 

“That’ll give you a laugh,” he said. 

Harry saw Ron's eyes widen in shock. He read the 
clipping quickly, gave a very forced laugh, and 
handed it to Harry. 

It had been clipped out of the Daily Prophet, and it 
said: 

INQUIRY AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC 

Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle 
Artifacts Office, was today fined fifty Galleons for 
bewitching a Muggle car. 

Mr. Lucius Malfoy, a governor of Hogwarts School of 
Witchcraft and Wizardry, where the enchanted car 
crashed earlier this year, called today for Mr. 
Weasley’s resignation. 

“Weasley has brought the Ministry into disrepute,” 

Mr. Malfoy told our reporter. “He is clearly unfit to 
draw up our laws and his ridiculous Muggle 
Protection Act should be scrapped immediately.” 

Mr. Weasley was unavailable for comment, although 
his wife told reporters to clear off or she’d set the 
family ghoul on them. 



Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Well?” said Malfoy impatiently as Harry handed the 
clipping back to him. “Don’t you think it’s funny?” 

“Ha, ha,” said Harry bleakly. 

“Arthur Weasley loves Muggles so much he should 
snap his wand in half and go and join them,” said 
Malfoy scornfully. “You’d never know the Weasleys 
were purebloods, the way they behave.” 

Ron’s — or rather, Crabbe’s — face was contorted 
with fury. 

“What’s up with you, Crabbe?” snapped Malfoy. 
“Stomachache,” Ron grunted. 

“Well, go up to the hospital wing and give all those 
Mudbloods a kick from me,” said Malfoy, snickering. 
“You know, I’m surprised the Daily Prophet hasn’t 
reported all these attacks yet,” he went on 
thoughtfully. “I suppose Dumbledore’s trying to hush 
it all up. He’ll be sacked if it doesn’t stop soon. 
Father’s always said old Dumbledore’s the worst thing 
that’s ever happened to this place. He loves Muggle- 
borns. A decent headmaster would never ’ve let slime 
like that Creevey in.” 

Malfoy started taking pictures with an imaginary 
camera and did a cruel but accurate impression of 
Colin: “ ‘Potter, can I have your picture, Potter? Can I 
have your autograph? Can I lick your shoes, please, 
Potter?’ ” 

He dropped his hands and looked at Harry and Ron. 
“What’s the matter with you two?” 



Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Far too late, Harry and Ron forced themselves to 
laugh, but Malfoy seemed satisfied; perhaps Crabbe 
and Goyle were always slow on the uptake. 

“Saint Potter, the Mudbloods’ friend,” said Malfoy 
slowly. “He’s another one with no proper wizard 
feeling, or he wouldn’t go around with that jumped-up 
Granger Mudblood. And people think he’s Slytherin’s 
heir!” 

Harry and Ron waited with bated breath: Malfoy was 
surely seconds away from telling them it was him — 
but then — 

“I wish I knew who it is,” said Malfoy petulantly. “I 
could help them.” 

Ron’s jaw dropped so that Crabbe looked even more 
clueless than usual. Fortunately, Malfoy didn’t notice, 
and Harry, thinking fast, said, “You must have some 
idea who’s behind it all. ...” 

“You know I haven’t, Goyle, how many times do I have 
to tell you?” snapped Malfoy. “And Father won’t tell 
me anything about the last time the Chamber was 
opened either. Of course, it was fifty years ago, so it 
was before his time, but he knows all about it, and he 
says that it was all kept quiet and it’ll look suspicious 
if I know too much about it. But I know one thing — 
last time the Chamber of Secrets was opened, a 
Mudblood died. So I bet it’s a matter of time before 
one of them’s killed this time. ... I hope it’s Granger,” 
he said with relish. 

Ron was clenching Crabbe ’s gigantic fists. Feeling 
that it would be a bit of a giveaway if Ron punched 
Malfoy, Harry shot him a warning look and said, 
“D’you know if the person who opened the Chamber 
last time was caught?” 

Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, yeah ... whoever it was was expelled,” said 
Malfoy. “They’re probably still in Azkaban.” 



“Azkaban?” said Harry, puzzled. 

“Azkaban — the wizard prison , Goyle,” said Malfoy, 
looking at him in disbelief. “Honestly, if you were any 
slower, you’d be going backward.” 

He shifted restlessly in his chair and said, “Father 
says to keep my head down and let the Heir of 
Slytherin get on with it. He says the school needs 
ridding of all the Mudblood filth, but not to get mixed 
up in it. Of course, he’s got a lot on his plate at the 
moment. You know the Ministry of Magic raided our 
manor last week?” 

Harry tried to force Goyle ’s dull face into a look of 
concern. 

“Yeah ...” said Malfoy. “Luckily, they didn’t find much. 
Father’s got some very valuable Dark Arts stuff. But 
luckily, we’ve got our own secret chamber under the 
drawing-room floor — ” 

“Ho!” said Ron. 

Malfoy looked at him. So did Harry. Ron blushed. 

Even his hair was turning red. His nose was also 
slowly lengthening — their hour was up, Ron was 
turning back into himself, and from the look of horror 
he was suddenly giving Harry, he must be, too. 

They both jumped to their feet. 

“Medicine for my stomach,” Ron grunted, and without 
further ado they sprinted the length of the Slytherin 
common room, hurled themselves at the stone wall, 
and dashed up the passage, hoping against hope that 

Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy hadn’t noticed anything. Harry could feel his 
feet slipping around in Goyle’s huge shoes and had to 
hoist up his robes as he shrank; they crashed up the 
steps into the dark entrance hall, which was full of a 
muffled pounding coming from the closet where 
they’d locked Crabbe and Goyle. Leaving their shoes 
outside the closet door, they sprinted in their socks 
up the marble staircase toward Moaning Myrtle’s 
bathroom. 

“Well, it wasn’t a complete waste of time,” Ron 
panted, closing the bathroom door behind them. “I 
know we still haven’t found out who’s doing the 
attacks, but I’m going to write to Dad tomorrow and 
tell him to check under the Malfoys’ drawing room.” 

Harry checked his face in the cracked mirror. He was 
back to normal. He put his glasses on as Ron 
hammered on the door of Hermione’s stall. 

“Hermione, come out, we’ve got loads to tell you — ” 

“Go away!” Hermione squeaked. 

Harry and Ron looked at each other. 

“What’s the matter?” said Ron. “You must be back to 
normal by now, we are — ” 

But Moaning Myrtle glided suddenly through the stall 
door. Harry had never seen her looking so happy. 

“Ooooooh, wait till you see,” she said. “It’s awful — ” 

They heard the lock slide back and Hermione 
emerged, sobbing, her robes pulled up over her head. 

“What’s up?” said Ron uncertainly. “Have you still got 
Millicent’s nose or something?” 

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione let her robes fall and Ron backed into the 
sink. 

Her face was covered in black fur. Her eyes had 
turned yellow and there were long, pointed ears 
poking through her hair. 

“It was a c-cat hair!” she howled. “M-Millicent 
Bulstrode m-must have a cat! And the p-potion isn’t 
supposed to be used for animal transformations!” 

“Uh-oh,” said Ron. 

“You’ll be teased something dreadful,” said Myrtle 
happily. 

“It’s okay, Hermione,” said Harry quickly. “We’ll take 
you up to the hospital wing. Madam Pomfrey never 
asks too many questions. ...” 

It took a long time to persuade Hermione to leave the 
bathroom. Moaning Myrtle sped them on their way 
with a hearty guffaw. “Wait till everyone finds out 
you’ve got a tail\” 



Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 





* V 




THE VERY SECRET DIARY 

Hermione remained in the hospital wing for several 
weeks. There was a flurry of rumor about her 
disappearance when the rest of the school arrived 
back from their Christmas holidays, because of 
course everyone thought that she had been attacked. 
So many students filed past the hospital wing trying 
to catch a glimpse of her that Madam Pomfrey took 
out her curtains again and placed them around 
Hermione’s bed, to spare her the shame of being seen 
with a furry face. 

Harry and Ron went to visit her every evening. When 
the new term started, they brought her each day’s 
homework. 

“If I’d sprouted whiskers, I’d take a break from work,” 
said Ron, tipping a stack of books onto Hermione’s 
bedside table one evening. 

“Don’t be silly, Ron, I’ve got to keep up,” said 
Hermione briskly. Her spirits were greatly improved 
by the fact that all the hair had gone from her face 

Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



and her eyes were turning slowly back to brown. “I 
don’t suppose you’ve got any new leads?” she added 
in a whisper, so that Madam Pomfrey couldn’t hear 
her. 

“Nothing,” said Harry gloomily. 

“I was so sure it was Malfoy,” said Ron, for about the 
hundredth time. 

“What’s that?” asked Harry, pointing to something 
gold sticking out from under Hermione’s pillow. 

“Just a get well card,” said Hermione hastily, trying to 
poke it out of sight, but Ron was too quick for her. He 
pulled it out, flicked it open, and read aloud: 

“To Miss Granger, wishing you a speedy recovery, from 
your concerned teacher, Professor Gilderoy Lockhart, 
Order of Merlin, Third Class, Honorary Member of the 
Dark Force Defense League, and five-time winner of 
Witch Weekly’s Most-Charming-Smile Award.” 

Ron looked up at Hermione, disgusted. 

“You sleep with this under your pillow?” 

But Hermione was spared answering by Madam 
Pomfrey sweeping over with her evening dose of 
medicine. 

“Is Lockhart the smarmiest bloke you’ve ever met, or 
what?” Ron said to Harry as they left the infirmary 
and started up the stairs toward Gryffindor Tower. 
Snape had given them so much homework, Harry 
thought he was likely to be in the sixth year before he 
finished it. Ron was just saying he wished he had 
asked Hermione how many rat tails you were 
supposed to add to a Hair-Raising Potion when an 
Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




angry outburst from the floor above reached their 
ears. 

“That’s Filch,” Harry muttered as they hurried up the 
stairs and paused, out of sight, listening hard. 

“You don’t think someone else’s been attacked?” said 
Ron tensely. 

They stood still, their heads inclined toward Filch’s 
voice, which sounded quite hysterical. 

“ — even more work for me! Mopping all night, like I 
haven’t got enough to do! No, this is the final straw, I’m 
going to Dumbledore — ” 

His footsteps receded along the out-of-sight corridor 
and they heard a distant door slam. 

They poked their heads around the corner. Filch had 
clearly been manning his usual lookout post: They 
were once again on the spot where Mrs. Norris had 
been attacked. They saw at a glance what Filch had 
been shouting about. A great flood of water stretched 
over half the corridor, and it looked as though it was 
still seeping from under the door of Moaning Myrtle’s 
bathroom. Now that Filch had stopped shouting, they 
could hear Myrtle’s wails echoing off the bathroom 
walls. 

“Now what’s up with her?” said Ron. 

“Let’s go and see,” said Harry, and holding their robes 
over their ankles they stepped through the great wash 
of water to the door bearing its OUT OF ORDER sign, 
ignored it as always, and entered. 

Moaning Myrtle was crying, if possible, louder and 
harder than ever before. She seemed to be hiding 

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




down her usual toilet. It was dark in the bathroom 
because the candles had been extinguished in the 
great rush of water that had left both walls and floor 
soaking wet. 

“What’s up, Myrtle?” said Harry. 

“Who’s that?” glugged Myrtle miserably. “Come to 
throw something else at me?” 

Harry waded across to her stall and said, “Why would 
I throw something at you?” 

“Don’t ask me,” Myrtle shouted, emerging with a wave 
of yet more water, which splashed onto the already 
sopping floor. “Here I am, minding my own business, 
and someone thinks it’s funny to throw a book at me. 



“But it can’t hurt you if someone throws something at 
you,” said Harry, reasonably. “I mean, it’d just go 
right through you, wouldn’t it?” 

He had said the wrong thing. Myrtle puffed herself up 
and shrieked, “Let’s all throw books at Myrtle, 
because she can’t feel it! Ten points if you can get it 
through her stomach! Fifty points if it goes through 
her head! Well, ha, ha, ha! What a lovely game, I don’t 
think!” 

“Who threw it at you, anyway?” asked Harry. 

“I don’t know. ... I was just sitting in the U-bend, 
thinking about death, and it fell right through the top 
of my head,” said Myrtle, glaring at them. “It’s over 
there, it got washed out. ...” 

Harry and Ron looked under the sink where Myrtle 
was pointing. A small, thin book lay there. It had a 

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




shabby black cover and was as wet as everything else 
in the bathroom. Harry stepped forward to pick it up, 
but Ron suddenly flung out an arm to hold him back. 

“What?” said Harry. 

“Are you cra2y?” said Ron. “It could be dangerous.” 

“ Dangerous ?” said Harry, laughing. “Come off it, how 
could it be dangerous?” 

“You’d be surprised,” said Ron, who was looking 
apprehensively at the book. “Some of the books the 
Ministry’s confiscated — Dad’s told me — there was 
one that burned your eyes out. And everyone who 
read Sonnets of a Sorcerer spoke in limericks for the 
rest of their lives. And some old witch in Bath had a 
book that you could never stop reading ! You just had 
to wander around with your nose in it, trying to do 
everything one-handed. And — ” 

“All right, I’ve got the point,” said Harry. 

The little book lay on the floor, nondescript and 
soggy. 

“Well, we won’t find out unless we look at it,” he said, 
and he ducked around Ron and picked it up off the 
floor. 

Harry saw at once that it was a diary, and the faded 
year on the cover told him it was fifty years old. He 
opened it eagerly. On the first page he could just 
make out the name “T. M. Riddle” in smudged ink. 

“Hang on,” said Ron, who had approached cautiously 
and was looking over Harry’s shoulder. “I know that 
name. ... T. M. Riddle got an award for special 
services to the school fifty years ago.” 

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“How on earth d’you know that?” said Harry in 
amazement. 

“Because Filch made me polish his shield about fifty 
times in detention,” said Ron resentfully. “That was 
the one I burped slugs all over. If you’d wiped slime 
off a name for an hour, you’d remember it, too.” 

Harry peeled the wet pages apart. They were 
completely blank. There wasn’t the faintest trace of 
writing on any of them, not even Auntie Mabel’s 
birthday, or dentist, half-past three. 

“He never wrote in it,” said Harry, disappointed. 

“I wonder why someone wanted to flush it away?” said 
Ron curiously. 

Harry turned to the back cover of the book and saw 
the printed name of a variety store on Vauxhall Road, 
London. 

“He must’ve been Muggle-born,” said Harry 
thoughtfully. “To have bought a diary from Vauxhall 
Road. ...” 

“Well, it’s not much use to you,” said Ron. He 
dropped his voice. “Fifty points if you can get it 
through Myrtle’s nose.” 

Harry, however, pocketed it. 

Hermione left the hospital wing, de-whiskered, tail- 
less, and fur-free, at the beginning of February. On 
her first evening back in Gryffindor Tower, Harry 
showed her T. M. Riddle’s diary and told her the story 
of how they had found it. 



Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Oooh, it might have hidden powers,” said Hermione 
enthusiastically, taking the diary and looking at it 
closely. 

“If it has, it’s hiding them very well,” said Ron. “Maybe 
it’s shy. I don’t know why you don’t chuck it, Harry.” 

“I wish I knew why someone did try to chuck it,” said 
Harry. “I wouldn’t mind knowing how Riddle got an 
award for special services to Hogwarts either.” 

“Could’ve been anything,” said Ron. “Maybe he got 
thirty O.W.L.s or saved a teacher from the giant 
squid. Maybe he murdered Myrtle; that would’ve done 
everyone a favor. ...” 

But Harry could tell from the arrested look on 
Hermione ’s face that she was thinking what he was 
thinking. 

“What?” said Ron, looking from one to the other. 

“Well, the Chamber of Secrets was opened fifty years 
ago, wasn’t it?” he said. “That’s what Malfoy said.” 

“Yeah ...” said Ron slowly. 

“And this diary is fifty years old,” said Hermione, 
tapping it excitedly. 

“So?” 

“Oh, Ron, wake up,” snapped Hermione. “We know 
the person who opened the Chamber last time was 
expelled fifty years ago. We know T. M. Riddle got an 
award for special services to the school fifty years 
ago. Well, what if Riddle got his special award for 
catching the Heir of Slytherin? His diary would 
probably tell us everything — where the Chamber is, 
Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




and how to open it, and what sort of creature lives in 
it — the person who’s behind the attacks this time 
wouldn’t want that lying around, would they?” 

“That’s a brilliant theory, Hermione,” said Ron, “with 
just one tiny little flaw. There’s nothing written in his 
diary.” 

But Hermione was pulling her wand out of her bag. 

“It might be invisible ink!” she whispered. 

She tapped the diary three times and said, 
“Aparecium\” 

Nothing happened. Undaunted, Hermione shoved her 
hand back into her bag and pulled out what appeared 
to be a bright red eraser. 

“It’s a Revealer, I got it in Diagon Alley,” she said. 

She rubbed hard on January first. Nothing happened. 

“I’m telling you, there’s nothing to find in there,” said 
Ron. “Riddle just got a diary for Christmas and 
couldn’t be bothered filling it in.” 

Harry couldn’t explain, even to himself, why he didn’t 
just throw Riddle’s diary away. The fact was that even 
though he knew the diary was blank, he kept 
absentmindedly picking it up and turning the pages, 
as though it were a story he wanted to finish. And 
while Harry was sure he had never heard the name T. 
M. Riddle before, it still seemed to mean something to 
him, almost as though Riddle was a friend he’d had 
when he was very small, and had half-forgotten. But 
this was absurd. He’d never had friends before 
Hogwarts, Dudley had made sure of that. 



Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Nevertheless, Harry was determined to find out more 
about Riddle, so next day at break, he headed for the 
trophy room to examine Riddle’s special award, 
accompanied by an interested Hermione and a 
thoroughly unconvinced Ron, who told them he’d 
seen enough of the trophy room to last him a lifetime. 

Riddle’s burnished gold shield was tucked away in a 
corner cabinet. It didn’t carry details of why it had 
been given to him (“Good thing, too, or it’d be even 
bigger and I’d still be polishing it,” said Ron). 

However, they did find Riddle’s name on an old Medal 
for Magical Merit, and on a list of old Head Boys. 

“He sounds like Percy,” said Ron, wrinkling his nose 
in disgust. “Prefect, Head Boy ... probably top of every 
class — ” 

“You say that like it’s a bad thing,” said Hermione in a 
slightly hurt voice. 

The sun had now begun to shine weakly on Hogwarts 
again. Inside the castle, the mood had grown more 
hopeful. There had been no more attacks since those 
on Justin and Nearly Headless Nick, and Madam 
Pomfrey was pleased to report that the Mandrakes 
were becoming moody and secretive, meaning that 
they were fast leaving childhood. 

“The moment their acne clears up, they’ll be ready for 
repotting again,” Harry heard her telling Filch kindly 
one afternoon. “And after that, it won’t be long until 
we’re cutting them up and stewing them. You’ll have 
Mrs. Norris back in no time.” 

Perhaps the Heir of Slytherin had lost his or her 
nerve, thought Harry. It must be getting riskier and 
riskier to open the Chamber of Secrets, with the 
school so alert and suspicious. Perhaps the monster, 

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




whatever it was, was even now settling itself down to 
hibernate for another fifty years. ... 



Ernie Macmillan of Hufflepuff didn’t take this cheerful 
view. He was still convinced that Harry was the guilty 
one, that he had “given himself away” at the Dueling 
Club. Peeves wasn’t helping matters; he kept popping 
up in the crowded corridors singing “Oh, Potter, you 
rotter ...” now with a dance routine to match. 

Gilderoy Lockhart seemed to think he himself had 
made the attacks stop. Harry overheard him telling 
Professor McGonagall so while the Gryffindors were 
lining up for Transfiguration. 

“I don’t think there’ll be any more trouble, Minerva,” 
he said, tapping his nose knowingly and winking. “I 
think the Chamber has been locked for good this 
time. The culprit must have known it was only a 
matter of time before I caught him. Rather sensible to 
stop now, before I came down hard on him. 

“You know, what the school needs now is a morale- 
booster. Wash away the memories of last term! I won’t 
say any more just now, but I think I know just the 
thing. ...” 

He tapped his nose again and strode off. 

Lockhart’s idea of a morale-booster became clear at 
breakfast time on February fourteenth. Harry hadn’t 
had much sleep because of a late-running Quidditch 
practice the night before, and he hurried down to the 
Great Hall, slightly late. He thought, for a moment, 
that he’d walked through the wrong doors. 

The walls were all covered with large, lurid pink 
flowers. Worse still, heart-shaped confetti was falling 
from the pale blue ceiling. Harry went over to the 

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Gryffindor table, where Ron was sitting looking 
sickened, and Hermione seemed to have been 
overcome with giggles. 

“What’s going on?” Harry asked them, sitting down 
and wiping confetti off his bacon. 

Ron pointed to the teachers’ table, apparently too 
disgusted to speak. Lockhart, wearing lurid pink 
robes to match the decorations, was waving for 
silence. The teachers on either side of him were 
looking stony-faced. From where he sat, Harry could 
see a muscle going in Professor McGonagall’s cheek. 
Snape looked as though someone had just fed him a 
large beaker of Skele-Gro. 

“Happy Valentine’s Day!” Lockhart shouted. “And may 
I thank the forty-six people who have so far sent me 
cards! Yes, I have taken the liberty of arranging this 
little surprise for you all — and it doesn’t end here!” 

Lockhart clapped his hands and through the doors to 
the entrance hall marched a dozen surly-looking 
dwarfs. Not just any dwarfs, however. Lockhart had 
them all wearing golden wings and carrying harps. 

“My friendly, card-carrying cupids!” beamed Lockhart. 
“They will be roving around the school today 
delivering your valentines! And the fun doesn’t stop 
here! I’m sure my colleagues will want to enter into 
the spirit of the occasion! Why not ask Professor 
Snape to show you how to whip up a Love Potion! And 
while you’re at it, Professor Flitwick knows more 
about Entrancing Enchantments than any wizard I’ve 
ever met, the sly old dog!” 

Professor Flitwick buried his face in his hands. Snape 
was looking as though the first person to ask him for 
a Love Potion would be force-fed poison. 

Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Please, Hermione, tell me you weren’t one of the 
forty-six,” said Ron as they left the Great Hall for their 
first lesson. Hermione suddenly became very 
interested in searching her bag for her schedule and 
didn’t answer. 

All day long, the dwarfs kept barging into their 
classes to deliver valentines, to the annoyance of the 
teachers, and late that afternoon as the Gryffindors 
were walking upstairs for Charms, one of the dwarfs 
caught up with Harry. 

“Oy, you! ’Arry Potter!” shouted a particularly grim- 
looking dwarf, elbowing people out of the way to get to 
Harry. 

Hot all over at the thought of being given a valentine 
in front of a line of first years, which happened to 
include Ginny Weasley, Harry tried to escape. The 
dwarf, however, cut his way through the crowd by 
kicking people’s shins, and reached him before he’d 
gone two paces. 

“I’ve got a musical message to deliver to ’Arry Potter in 
person,” he said, twanging his harp in a threatening 
sort of way. 

“Not here,” Harry hissed, trying to escape. 

“Stay stilll” grunted the dwarf, grabbing hold of 
Harry’s bag and pulling him back. 

“Let me go!” Harry snarled, tugging. 

With a loud ripping noise, his bag split in two. His 
books, wand, parchment, and quill spilled onto the 
floor and his ink bottle smashed over everything. 



Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry scrambled around, trying to pick it all up 
before the dwarf started singing, causing something of 
a holdup in the corridor. 

“What’s going on here?” came the cold, drawling voice 
of Draco Malfoy. Harry started stuffing everything 
feverishly into his ripped bag, desperate to get away 
before Malfoy could hear his musical valentine. 

“What’s all this commotion?” said another familiar 
voice as Percy Weasley arrived. 

Losing his head, Harry tried to make a run for it, but 
the dwarf seized him around the knees and brought 
him crashing to the floor. 

“Right,” he said, sitting on Harry’s ankles. “Here is 
your singing valentine: 

His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad, 

His hair is as dark as a blackboard. 

I wish he was mine, he’s really divine, 

The hero who conquered the Dark Lord.” 

Harry would have given all the gold in Gringotts to 
evaporate on the spot. Trying valiantly to laugh along 
with everyone else, he got up, his feet numb from the 
weight of the dwarf, as Percy Weasley did his best to 
disperse the crowd, some of whom were crying with 
mirth. 

“Off you go, off you go, the bell rang five minutes ago, 
off to class, now,” he said, shooing some of the 
younger students away. “And you, Malfoy — ” 



Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, glancing over, saw Malfoy stoop and snatch up 
something. Leering, he showed it to Crabbe and 
Goyle, and Harry realized that he’d got Riddle’s diary. 

“Give that back,” said Harry quietly. 

“Wonder what Potter’s written in this?” said Malfoy, 
who obviously hadn’t noticed the year on the cover 
and thought he had Harry’s own diary. A hush fell 
over the onlookers. Ginny was staring from the diary 
to Harry, looking terrified. 

“Hand it over, Malfoy,” said Percy sternly. 

“When I’ve had a look,” said Malfoy, waving the diary 
tauntingly at Harry. 

Percy said, “As a school prefect — ” but Harry had lost 
his temper. He pulled out his wand and shouted, 

“ ExpelliarmusV’ and just as Snape had disarmed 
Lockhart, so Malfoy found the diary shooting out of 
his hand into the air. Ron, grinning broadly, caught 
it. 

“Harry!” said Percy loudly. “No magic in the corridors. 
I’ll have to report this, you know!” 

But Harry didn’t care, he was one-up on Malfoy, and 
that was worth five points from Gryffindor any day. 
Malfoy was looking furious, and as Ginny passed him 
to enter her classroom, he yelled spitefully after her, 

“I don’t think Potter liked your valentine much!” 

Ginny covered her face with her hands and ran into 
class. Snarling, Ron pulled out his wand, too, but 
Harry pulled him away. Ron didn’t need to spend the 
whole of Charms belching slugs. 



Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




It wasn’t until they had reached Professor Flitwick’s 
class that Harry noticed something rather odd about 
Riddle’s diary. All his other books were drenched in 
scarlet ink. The diary, however, was as clean as it had 
been before the ink bottle had smashed all over it. He 
tried to point this out to Ron, but Ron was having 
trouble with his wand again; large purple bubbles 
were blossoming out of the end, and he wasn’t much 
interested in anything else. 



Jc Jc Jc 



Harry went to bed before anyone else in his 
dormitory that night. This was partly because he 
didn’t think he could stand Fred and George singing, 
“His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad” one 
more time, and partly because he wanted to examine 
Riddle’s diary again, and knew that Ron thought he 
was wasting his time. 

Harry sat on his four-poster and flicked through the 
blank pages, not one of which had a trace of scarlet 
ink on it. Then he pulled a new bottle out of his 
bedside cabinet, dipped his quill into it, and dropped 
a blot onto the first page of the diary. 

The ink shone brightly on the paper for a second and 
then, as though it was being sucked into the page, 
vanished. Excited, Harry loaded up his quill a second 
time and wrote, “My name is Harry Potter.” 

The words shone momentarily on the page and they, 
too, sank without trace. Then, at last, something 
happened. 

Oozing back out of the page, in his very own ink, 
came words Harry had never written. 



Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Hello, Harry Potter. My name is Tom Riddle. How did 
you come by my diary?” 

These words, too, faded away, but not before Harry 
had started to scribble back. 

“Someone tried to flush it down a toilet.” 

He waited eagerly for Riddle’s reply. 

“Lucky that I recorded my memories in some more 
lasting way than ink. But I always knew that there 
would be those who would not want this diary read.” 

“What do you mean?” Harry scrawled, blotting the 
page in his excitement. 

“I mean that this diary holds memories of terrible 
things. Things that were covered up. Things that 
happened at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and 
Wizardry.” 

“That’s where I am now,” Harry wrote quickly. “I’m at 
Hogwarts, and horrible stuff’s been happening. Do 
you know anything about the Chamber of Secrets?” 

His heart was hammering. Riddle’s reply came 
quickly, his writing becoming untidier, as though he 
was hurrying to tell all he knew. 

“Of course I know about the Chamber of Secrets. In my 
day, they told us it was a legend, that it did not exist. 
But this was a lie. In my fifth year, the Chamber was 
opened and the monster attacked several students, 
finally killing one. I caught the person who’d opened 
the Chamber and he was expelled. But the 
headmaster, Professor Dippet, ashamed that such a 
thing had happened at Hogwarts, forbade me to tell 
the truth. A story was given out that the girl had died 
Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




in a freak accident They gave me a nice, shiny, 
engraved trophy for my trouble and warned me to keep 
my mouth shut But I knew it could happen again. The 
monster lived on, and the one who had the power to 
release it was not imprisoned.” 

Harry nearly upset his ink bottle in his hurry to write 
back. 

“It’s happening again now. There have been three 
attacks and no one seems to know who’s behind 
them. Who was it last time?” 

“ I can show you, if you like,” came Riddle’s reply. “You 
don’t have to take my word for it. I can take you inside 
my memory of the night when I caught him.” 

Harry hesitated, his quill suspended over the diary. 
What did Riddle mean? How could he be taken inside 
somebody else’s memory? He glanced nervously at the 
door to the dormitory, which was growing dark. When 
he looked back at the diary, he saw fresh words 
forming. 

“Let me show you.” 

Harry paused for a fraction of a second and then 
wrote two letters. 

“OK.” 

The pages of the diary began to blow as though 
caught in a high wind, stopping halfway through the 
month of June. Mouth hanging open, Harry saw that 
the little square for June thirteenth seemed to have 
turned into a minuscule television screen. His hands 
trembling slightly, he raised the book to press his eye 
against the little window, and before he knew what 
was happening, he was tilting forward; the window 
Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




was widening, he felt his body leave his bed, and he 
was pitched headfirst through the opening in the 
page, into a whirl of color and shadow. 

He felt his feet hit solid ground, and stood, shaking, 
as the blurred shapes around him came suddenly 
into focus. 

He knew immediately where he was. This circular 
room with the sleeping portraits was Dumbledore’s 
office — but it wasn’t Dumbledore who was sitting 
behind the desk. A wizened, frail-looking wizard, bald 
except for a few wisps of white hair, was reading a 
letter by candlelight. Harry had never seen this man 
before. 

“I’m sorry,” he said shakily. “I didn’t mean to butt in 



But the wizard didn’t look up. He continued to read, 
frowning slightly. Harry drew nearer to his desk and 
stammered, “Er — I’ll just go, shall I?” 

Still the wizard ignored him. He didn’t seem even to 
have heard him. Thinking that the wizard might be 
deaf, Harry raised his voice. 

“Sorry I disturbed you. I’ll go now,” he half-shouted. 

The wizard folded up the letter with a sigh, stood up, 
walked past Harry without glancing at him, and went 
to draw the curtains at his window. 

The sky outside the window was ruby-red; it seemed 
to be sunset. The wizard went back to the desk, sat 
down, and twiddled his thumbs, watching the door. 

Harry looked around the office. No Fawkes the 
phoenix — no whirring silver contraptions. This was 

Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Hogwarts as Riddle had known it, meaning that this 
unknown wizard was headmaster, not Dumbledore, 
and he, Harry, was little more than a phantom, 
completely invisible to the people of fifty years ago. 

There was a knock on the office door. 

“Enter,” said the old wizard in a feeble voice. 

A boy of about sixteen entered, taking off his pointed 
hat. A silver prefect’s badge was glinting on his chest. 
He was much taller than Harry, but he, too, had jet- 
black hair. 

“Ah, Riddle,” said the headmaster. 

“You wanted to see me, Professor Dippet?” said 
Riddle. He looked nervous. 

“Sit down,” said Dippet. “I’ve just been reading the 
letter you sent me.” 

“Oh,” said Riddle. He sat down, gripping his hands 
together very tightly. 

“My dear boy,” said Dippet kindly, “I cannot possibly 
let you stay at school over the summer. Surely you 
want to go home for the holidays?” 

“No,” said Riddle at once. “I’d much rather stay at 
Hogwarts than go back to that — to that — ” 

“You live in a Muggle orphanage during the holidays, I 
believe?” said Dippet curiously. 

“Yes, sir,” said Riddle, reddening slightly. 

“You are Muggle-born?” 



Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Half-blood, sir,” said Riddle. “Muggle father, witch 
mother.” 

“And are both your parents — ?” 

“My mother died just after I was born, sir. They told 
me at the orphanage she lived just long enough to 
name me — Tom after my father, Marvolo after my 
grandfather.” 

Dippet clucked his tongue sympathetically. 

“The thing is, Tom,” he sighed, “special arrangements 
might have been made for you, but in the current 
circumstances. ...” 

“You mean all these attacks, sir?” said Riddle, and 
Harry’s heart leapt, and he moved closer, scared of 
missing anything. 

“Precisely,” said the headmaster. “My dear boy, you 
must see how foolish it would be of me to allow you to 
remain at the castle when term ends. Particularly in 
light of the recent tragedy . . . the death of that poor 
little girl. ... You will be safer by far at your 
orphanage. As a matter of fact, the Ministry of Magic 
is even now talking about closing the school. We are 
no nearer locating the — er — source of all this 
unpleasantness. ...” 

Riddle’s eyes had widened. 

“Sir — if the person was caught — if it all stopped — ” 

“What do you mean?” said Dippet with a squeak in 
his voice, sitting up in his chair. “Riddle, do you mean 
you know something about these attacks?” 

“No, sir,” said Riddle quickly. 

Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




But Harry was sure it was the same sort of “no” that 
he himself had given Dumbledore. 

Dippet sank back, looking faintly disappointed. 

“You may go, Tom. ...” 

Riddle slid off his chair and slouched out of the room. 
Harry followed him. 

Down the moving spiral staircase they went, emerging 
next to the gargoyle in the darkening corridor. Riddle 
stopped, and so did Harry, watching him. Harry could 
tell that Riddle was doing some serious thinking. He 
was biting his lip, his forehead furrowed. 

Then, as though he had suddenly reached a decision, 
he hurried off, Harry gliding noiselessly behind him. 
They didn’t see another person until they reached the 
entrance hall, when a tall wizard with long, sweeping 
auburn hair and a beard called to Riddle from the 
marble staircase. 

“What are you doing, wandering around this late, 
Tom?” 

Harry gaped at the wizard. He was none other than a 
fifty-year-younger Dumbledore. 

“I had to see the headmaster, sir,” said Riddle. 

“Well, hurry off to bed,” said Dumbledore, giving 
Riddle exactly the kind of penetrating stare Harry 
knew so well. “Best not to roam the corridors these 
days. Not since ...” 

He sighed heavily, bade Riddle good night, and strode 
off. Riddle watched him walk out of sight and then, 



Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




moving quickly, headed straight down the stone steps 
to the dungeons, with Harry in hot pursuit. 

But to Harry’s disappointment, Riddle led him not 
into a hidden passageway or a secret tunnel but to 
the very dungeon in which Harry had Potions with 
Snape. The torches hadn’t been lit, and when Riddle 
pushed the door almost closed, Harry could only just 
see him, standing stock-still by the door, watching 
the passage outside. 

It felt to Harry that they were there for at least an 
hour. All he could see was the figure of Riddle at the 
door, staring through the crack, waiting like a statue. 
And just when Harry had stopped feeling expectant 
and tense and started wishing he could return to the 
present, he heard something move beyond the door. 

Someone was creeping along the passage. He heard 
whoever it was pass the dungeon where he and Riddle 
were hidden. Riddle, quiet as a shadow, edged 
through the door and followed, Harry tiptoeing behind 
him, forgetting that he couldn’t be heard. 

For perhaps five minutes they followed the footsteps, 
until Riddle stopped suddenly, his head inclined in 
the direction of new noises. Harry heard a door creak 
open, and then someone speaking in a hoarse 
whisper. 

“C’mon ... gotta get yeh outta here. ... C’mon now ... 
in the box ...” 

There was something familiar about that voice. ... 

Riddle suddenly jumped around the corner. Harry 
stepped out behind him. He could see the dark 
outline of a huge boy who was crouching in front of 
an open door, a very large box next to it. 

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“ ’Evening, Rubeus,” said Riddle sharply. 

The boy slammed the door shut and stood up. 

“What yer doin’ down here, Tom?” 

Riddle stepped closer. 

“It’s all over,” he said. “I’m going to have to turn you 
in, Rubeus. They’re talking about closing Hogwarts if 
the attacks don’t stop.” 

“What d’yeh — ” 

“I don’t think you meant to kill anyone. But monsters 
don’t make good pets. I suppose you just let it out for 
exercise and — ” 

“It never killed no one!” said the large boy, backing 
against the closed door. From behind him, Harry 
could hear a funny rustling and clicking. 

“Come on, Rubeus,” said Riddle, moving yet closer. 
“The dead girl’s parents will be here tomorrow. The 
least Hogwarts can do is make sure that the thing 
that killed their daughter is slaughtered. ...” 

“It wasn’t him!” roared the boy, his voice echoing in 
the dark passage. “He wouldn’! He never!” 

“Stand aside,” said Riddle, drawing out his wand. 

His spell lit the corridor with a sudden flaming light. 
The door behind the large boy flew open with such 
force it knocked him into the wall opposite. And out of 
it came something that made Harry let out a long, 
piercing scream unheard by anyone — 



Page | 275 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




A vast, low-slung, hairy body and a tangle of black 
legs; a gleam of many eyes and a pair of razor-sharp 
pincers — Riddle raised his wand again, but he was 
too late. The thing bowled him over as it scuttled 
away, tearing up the corridor and out of sight. Riddle 
scrambled to his feet, looking after it; he raised his 
wand, but the huge boy leapt on him, seized his 
wand, and threw him back down, yelling, 
“NOOOOOOO!” 

The scene whirled, the darkness became complete; 
Harry felt himself falling and, with a crash, he landed 
spread-eagled on his four-poster in the Gryffindor 
dormitory, Riddle’s diary lying open on his stomach. 

Before he had had time to regain his breath, the 
dormitory door opened and Ron came in. 

“There you are,” he said. 

Harry sat up. He was sweating and shaking. 

“What’s up?” said Ron, looking at him with concern. 

“It was Hagrid, Ron. Hagrid opened the Chamber of 
Secrets fifty years ago.” 



Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






CORNELIUS FUDGE 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione had always known that 
Hagrid had an unfortunate liking for large and 
monstrous creatures. During their first year at 
Hogwarts he had tried to raise a dragon in his little 
wooden house, and it would be a long time before 
they forgot the giant, three-headed dog he’d 
christened “Fluffy.” And if, as a boy, Hagrid had heard 
that a monster was hidden somewhere in the castle, 
Harry was sure he’d have gone to any lengths for a 
glimpse of it. He’d probably thought it was a shame 
that the monster had been cooped up so long, and 
thought it deserved the chance to stretch its many 
legs; Harry could just imagine the thirteen-year-old 
Hagrid trying to fit a leash and collar on it. But he 
was equally certain that Hagrid would never have 
meant to kill anybody. 

Harry half wished he hadn’t found out how to work 
Riddle’s diary. Again and again Ron and Hermione 
made him recount what he’d seen, until he was 
heartily sick of telling them and sick of the long, 
circular conversations that followed. 

Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



“Riddle might have got the wrong person,” said 
Hermione. “Maybe it was some other monster that 
was attacking people. ...” 

“How many monsters d’you think this place can 
hold?” Ron asked dully. 

“We always knew Hagrid had been expelled,” said 
Harry miserably. “And the attacks must’ve stopped 
after Hagrid was kicked out. Otherwise, Riddle 
wouldn’t have got his award.” 

Ron tried a different tack. 

“Riddle does sound like Percy — who asked him to 
squeal on Hagrid, anyway?” 

“But the monster had killed someone, Ron,” said 
Hermione. 

“And Riddle was going to go back to some Muggle 
orphanage if they closed Hogwarts,” said Harry. “I 
don’t blame him for wanting to stay here. ...” 

“You met Hagrid down Knockturn Alley, didn’t you, 
Harry?” 

“He was buying a Flesh-Eating Slug Repellent,” said 
Harry quickly. 

The three of them fell silent. After a long pause, 
Hermione voiced the knottiest question of all in a 
hesitant voice. 

“Do you think we should go and ask Hagrid about it 
all?” 



Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“That’d be a cheerful visit,” said Ron. “ ‘Hello, Hagrid. 
Tell us, have you been setting anything mad and 
hairy loose in the castle lately?’ ” 

In the end, they decided that they would not say 
anything to Hagrid unless there was another attack, 
and as more and more days went by with no whisper 
from the disembodied voice, they became hopeful that 
they would never need to talk to him about why he 
had been expelled. It was now nearly four months 
since Justin and Nearly Headless Nick had been 
Petrified, and nearly everybody seemed to think that 
the attacker, whoever it was, had retired for good. 
Peeves had finally got bored of his “Oh, Potter, you 
rotter” song, Ernie Macmillan asked Harry quite 
politely to pass a bucket of leaping toadstools in 
Herbology one day, and in March several of the 
Mandrakes threw a loud and raucous party in 
greenhouse three. This made Professor Sprout very 
happy. 

“The moment they start trying to move into each 
other’s pots, we’ll know they’re fully mature,” she told 
Harry. “Then we’ll be able to revive those poor people 
in the hospital wing.” 

The second years were given something new to think 
about during their Easter holidays. The time had 
come to choose their subjects for the third year, a 
matter that Hermione, at least, took very seriously. 

“It could affect our whole future,” she told Harry and 
Ron as they pored over lists of new subjects, marking 
them with checks. 

“I just want to give up Potions,” said Harry. 



Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“We can’t,” said Ron gloomily. “We keep all our old 
subjects, or I’d’ve ditched Defense Against the Dark 
Arts.” 

“But that’s very important!” said Hermione, shocked. 

“Not the way Lockhart teaches it,” said Ron. “I haven’t 
learned anything from him except not to set pixies 
loose.” 

Neville Longbottom had been sent letters from all the 
witches and wizards in his family, all giving him 
different advice on what to choose. Confused and 
worried, he sat reading the subject lists with his 
tongue poking out, asking people whether they 
thought Arithmancy sounded more difficult than the 
study of Ancient Runes. Dean Thomas, who, like 
Harry, had grown up with Muggles, ended up closing 
his eyes and jabbing his wand at the list, then picking 
the subjects it landed on. Hermione took nobody’s 
advice but signed up for everything. 

Harry smiled grimly to himself at the thought of what 
Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia would say if he tried 
to discuss his career in wizardry with them. Not that 
he didn’t get any guidance: Percy Weasley was eager 
to share his experience. 

“Depends where you want to go, Harry,” he said. “It’s 
never too early to think about the future, so I’d 
recommend Divination. People say Muggle Studies is 
a soft option, but I personally think wizards should 
have a thorough understanding of the non-magical 
community, particularly if they’re thinking of working 
in close contact with them — look at my father, he 
has to deal with Muggle business all the time. My 
brother Charlie was always more of an outdoor type, 
so he went for Care of Magical Creatures. Play to your 
strengths, Harry.” 

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




But the only thing Harry felt he was really good at 
was Quidditch. In the end, he chose the same new 
subjects as Ron, feeling that if he was lousy at them, 
at least he’d have someone friendly to help him. 

Gryffindor’s next Quidditch match would be against 
Hufflepuff. Wood was insisting on team practices 
every night after dinner, so that Harry barely had 
time for anything but Quidditch and homework. 
However, the training sessions were getting better, or 
at least drier, and the evening before Saturday’s 
match he went up to his dormitory to drop off his 
broomstick feeling Gryffindor’s chances for the 
Quidditch Cup had never been better. 

But his cheerful mood didn’t last long. At the top of 
the stairs to the dormitory, he met Neville 
Longbottom, who was looking frantic. 

“Harry — I don’t know who did it — I just found — ” 

Watching Harry fearfully, Neville pushed open the 
door. 

The contents of Harry’s trunk had been thrown 
everywhere. His cloak lay ripped on the floor. The 
bedclothes had been pulled off his four-poster and the 
drawer had been pulled out of his bedside cabinet, 
the contents strewn over the mattress. 

Harry walked over to the bed, openmouthed, treading 
on a few loose pages of Travels with Trolls. As he and 
Neville pulled the blankets back onto his bed, Ron, 
Dean, and Seamus came in. Dean swore loudly. 

“What happened, Harry?” 

“No idea,” said Harry. But Ron was examining Harry’s 
robes. All the pockets were hanging out. 

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Someone’s been looking for something,” said Ron. “Is 
there anything missing?” 

Harry started to pick up all his things and throw 
them into his trunk. It was only as he threw the last 
of the Lockhart books back into it that he realized 
what wasn’t there. 

“Riddle’s diary’s gone,” he said in an undertone to 
Ron. 

“What?” 

Harry jerked his head toward the dormitory door and 
Ron followed him out. They hurried down to the 
Gryffindor common room, which was half-empty, and 
joined Hermione, who was sitting alone, reading a 
book called Ancient Runes Made Easy. 

Hermione looked aghast at the news. 

“But — only a Gryffindor could have stolen — nobody 
else knows our password — ” 

“Exactly,” said Harry. 

They woke the next day to brilliant sunshine and a 
light, refreshing breeze. 

“Perfect Quidditch conditions!” said Wood 
enthusiastically at the Gryffindor table, loading the 
team’s plates with scrambled eggs. “Harry, buck up 
there, you need a decent breakfast.” 

Harry had been staring down the packed Gryffindor 
table, wondering if the new owner of Riddle’s diary 
was right in front of his eyes. Hermione had been 
urging him to report the robbery, but Harry didn’t like 
the idea. He’d have to tell a teacher all about the 
Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




diary, and how many people knew why Hagrid had 
been expelled fifty years ago? He didn’t want to be the 
one who brought it all up again. 

As he left the Great Hall with Ron and Hermione to go 
and collect his Quidditch things, another very serious 
worry was added to Harry’s growing list. He had just 
set foot on the marble staircase when he heard it yet 
again — 

“ Kill this time ... let me rip ... tear ...” 

He shouted aloud and Ron and Hermione both 
jumped away from him in alarm. 

“The voice!” said Harry, looking over his shoulder. “I 
just heard it again — didn’t you?” 

Ron shook his head, wide-eyed. Hermione, however, 
clapped a hand to her forehead. 

“Harry — I think I’ve just understood something! I’ve 
got to go to the library!” 

And she sprinted away, up the stairs. 

“ What does she understand?” said Harry distractedly, 
still looking around, trying to tell where the voice had 
come from. 

“Loads more than I do,” said Ron, shaking his head. 

“But why’s she got to go to the library?” 

“Because that’s what Hermione does,” said Ron, 
shrugging. “When in doubt, go to the library.” 

Harry stood, irresolute, trying to catch the voice 
again, but people were now emerging from the Great 

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Hall behind him, talking loudly, exiting through the 
front doors on their way to the Quidditch pitch. 



“You’d better get moving,” said Ron. “It’s nearly eleven 
— the match — ” 

Harry raced up to Gryffindor Tower, collected his 
Nimbus Two Thousand, and joined the large crowd 
swarming across the grounds, but his mind was still 
in the castle along with the bodiless voice, and as he 
pulled on his scarlet robes in the locker room, his 
only comfort was that everyone was now outside to 
watch the game. 

The teams walked onto the field to tumultuous 
applause. Oliver Wood took off for a warm-up flight 
around the goal posts; Madam Hooch released the 
balls. The Hufflepuffs, who played in canary yellow, 
were standing in a huddle, having a last-minute 
discussion of tactics. 

Harry was just mounting his broom when Professor 
McGonagall came half marching, half running across 
the pitch, carrying an enormous purple megaphone. 

Harry’s heart dropped like a stone. 

“This match has been canceled,” Professor 
McGonagall called through the megaphone, 
addressing the packed stadium. There were boos and 
shouts. Oliver Wood, looking devastated, landed and 
ran toward Professor McGonagall without getting off 
his broomstick. 

“But, Professor!” he shouted. “We’ve got to play — the 
Cup — Gryffindor — ” 

Professor McGonagall ignored him and continued to 
shout through her megaphone: 

Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“All students are to make their way back to the House 
common rooms, where their Heads of Houses will give 
them further information. As quickly as you can, 
please!” 

Then she lowered the megaphone and beckoned 
Harry over to her. 

“Potter, I think you’d better come with me. ...” 

Wondering how she could possibly suspect him this 
time, Harry saw Ron detach himself from the 
complaining crowd; he came running up to them as 
they set off toward the castle. To Harry’s surprise, 
Professor McGonagall didn’t object. 

“Yes, perhaps you’d better come, too, Weasley. ...” 

Some of the students swarming around them were 
grumbling about the match being canceled; others 
looked worried. Harry and Ron followed Professor 
McGonagall back into the school and up the marble 
staircase. But they weren’t taken to anybody’s office 
this time. 

“This will be a bit of a shock,” said Professor 
McGonagall in a surprisingly gentle voice as they 
approached the infirmary. “There has been another 
attack ... another double attack.” 

Harry’s insides did a horrible somersault. Professor 
McGonagall pushed the door open and he and Ron 
entered. 

Madam Pomfrey was bending over a sixth-year girl 
with long, curly hair. Harry recognized her as the 
Ravenclaw they’d accidentally asked for directions to 
the Slytherin common room. And on the bed next to 
her was — 

Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“HermioneY’ Ron groaned. 

Hermione lay utterly still, her eyes open and glassy. 

“They were found near the library,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “I don’t suppose either of you can 
explain this? It was on the floor next to them. ...” 

She was holding up a small, circular mirror. 

Harry and Ron shook their heads, both staring at 
Hermione. 

“I will escort you back to Gryffindor Tower,” said 
Professor McGonagall heavily. “I need to address the 
students in any case.” 

“All students will return to their House common 
rooms by six o’clock in the evening. No student is to 
leave the dormitories after that time. You will be 
escorted to each lesson by a teacher. No student is to 
use the bathroom unaccompanied by a teacher. All 
further Quidditch training and matches are to be 
postponed. There will be no more evening activities.” 

The Gryffindors packed inside the common room 
listened to Professor McGonagall in silence. She rolled 
up the parchment from which she had been reading 
and said in a somewhat choked voice, “I need hardly 
add that I have rarely been so distressed. It is likely 
that the school will be closed unless the culprit 
behind these attacks is caught. I would urge anyone 
who thinks they might know anything about them to 
come forward.” 

She climbed somewhat awkwardly out of the portrait 
hole, and the Gryffindors began talking immediately. 



Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s two Gryffindors down, not counting a 
Gryffindor ghost, one Ravenclaw, and one Hufflepuff,” 
said the Weasley twins’ friend Lee Jordan, counting 
on his fingers. “Haven’t any of the teachers noticed 
that the Slytherins are all safe? Isn’t it obvious all this 
stuff’s coming from Slytherin? The Heir of Slytherin, 
the monster of Slytherin — why don’t they just chuck 
all the Slytherins out?” he roared, to nods and 
scattered applause. 

Percy Weasley was sitting in a chair behind Lee, but 
for once he didn’t seem keen to make his views heard. 
He was looking pale and stunned. 

“Percy’s in shock,” George told Harry quietly. “That 
Ravenclaw girl — Penelope Clearwater — she’s a 
prefect. I don’t think he thought the monster would 
dare attack a prefect.” 

But Harry was only half-listening. He didn’t seem to 
be able to get rid of the picture of Hermione, lying on 
the hospital bed as though carved out of stone. And if 
the culprit wasn’t caught soon, he was looking at a 
lifetime back with the Dursleys. Tom Riddle had 
turned Hagrid in because he was faced with the 
prospect of a Muggle orphanage if the school closed. 
Harry now knew exactly how he had felt. 

“What’re we going to do?” said Ron quietly in Harry’s 
ear. “D’you think they suspect Hagrid?” 

“We’ve got to go and talk to him,” said Harry, making 
up his mind. “I can’t believe it’s him this time, but if 
he set the monster loose last time he’ll know how to 
get inside the Chamber of Secrets, and that’s a start.” 

“But McGonagall said we’ve got to stay in our tower 
unless we’re in class — ” 



Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I think,” said Harry, more quietly still, “it’s time to 
get my dad’s old cloak out again.” 

Harry had inherited just one thing from his father: a 
long and silvery Invisibility Cloak. It was their only 
chance of sneaking out of the school to visit Hagrid 
without anyone knowing about it. They went to bed at 
the usual time, waited until Neville, Dean, and 
Seamus had stopped discussing the Chamber of 
Secrets and finally fallen asleep, then got up, dressed 
again, and threw the cloak over themselves. 

The journey through the dark and deserted castle 
corridors wasn’t enjoyable. Harry, who had wandered 
the castle at night several times before, had never 
seen it so crowded after sunset. Teachers, prefects, 
and ghosts were marching the corridors in pairs, 
staring around for any unusual activity. Their 
Invisibility Cloak didn’t stop them making any noise, 
and there was a particularly tense moment when Ron 
stubbed his toe only yards from the spot where Snape 
stood standing guard. Thankfully, Snape sneezed at 
almost exactly the moment Ron swore. It was with 
relief that they reached the oak front doors and eased 
them open. 

It was a clear, starry night. They hurried toward the 
lit windows of Hagrid ’s house and pulled off the cloak 
only when they were right outside his front door. 

Seconds after they had knocked, Hagrid flung it open. 
They found themselves face-to-face with him aiming a 
crossbow at them. Fang the boarhound barked loudly 
behind him. 

“Oh,” he said, lowering the weapon and staring at 
them. “What ’re you two doin’ here?” 



Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“What’s that for?” said Harry, pointing at the 
crossbow as they stepped inside. 



“Nothin’ — nothin’ — “ Hagrid muttered. “I’ve bin 
expectin’ — doesn’ matter — Sit down — I’ll make tea 



He hardly seemed to know what he was doing. He 
nearly extinguished the fire, spilling water from the 
kettle on it, and then smashed the teapot with a 
nervous jerk of his massive hand. 

“Are you okay, Hagrid?” said Harry. “Did you hear 
about Hermione?” 

“Oh, I heard, all righ’,” said Hagrid, a slight break in 
his voice. 

He kept glancing nervously at the windows. He 
poured them both large mugs of boiling water (he had 
forgotten to add tea bags) and was just putting a slab 
of fruitcake on a plate when there was a loud knock 
on the door. 

Hagrid dropped the fruitcake. Harry and Ron 
exchanged panic-stricken looks, then threw the 
Invisibility Cloak back over themselves and retreated 
into a corner. Hagrid checked that they were hidden, 
seized his crossbow, and flung open his door once 
more. 

“Good evening, Hagrid.” 

It was Dumbledore. He entered, looking deadly 
serious, and was followed by a second, very odd- 
looking man. 

The stranger had rumpled gray hair and an anxious 
expression, and was wearing a strange mixture of 

Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




clothes: a pinstriped suit, a scarlet tie, a long black 
cloak, and pointed purple boots. Under his arm he 
carried a lime-green bowler. 

“That’s Dad’s boss!” Ron breathed. “Cornelius Fudge, 
the Minister of Magic!” 

Harry elbowed Ron hard to make him shut up. 

Hagrid had gone pale and sweaty. He dropped into 
one of his chairs and looked from Dumbledore to 
Cornelius Fudge. 

“Bad business, Hagrid,” said Fudge in rather clipped 
tones. “Very bad business. Had to come. Four attacks 
on Muggle-borns. Things’ve gone far enough. 
Ministry’s got to act.” 

“I never,” said Hagrid, looking imploringly at 
Dumbledore. “You know I never, Professor 
Dumbledore, sir — ” 

“I want it understood, Cornelius, that Hagrid has my 
full confidence,” said Dumbledore, frowning at Fudge. 

“Look, Albus,” said Fudge, uncomfortably. “Hagrid’s 
record’s against him. Ministry’s got to do something 
— the school governors have been in touch — ” 

“Yet again, Cornelius, I tell you that taking Hagrid 
away will not help in the slightest,” said Dumbledore. 
His blue eyes were full of a fire Harry had never seen 
before. 

“Look at it from my point of view,” said Fudge, 
fidgeting with his bowler. “I’m under a lot of pressure. 
Got to be seen to be doing something. If it turns out it 
wasn’t Hagrid, he’ll be back and no more said. But 



Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




I’ve got to take him. Got to. Wouldn’t be doing my 
duty — ” 

“Take me?” said Hagrid, who was trembling. “Take me 
where?” 

“For a short stretch only,” said Fudge, not meeting 
Hagrid ’s eyes. “Not a punishment, Hagrid, more a 
precaution. If someone else is caught, you’ll be let out 
with a full apology — ” 

“Not Azkaban?” croaked Hagrid. 

Before Fudge could answer, there was another loud 
rap on the door. 

Dumbledore answered it. It was Harry’s turn for an 
elbow in the ribs; he’d let out an audible gasp. 

Mr. Lucius Malfoy strode into Hagrid’s hut, swathed 
in a long black traveling cloak, smiling a cold and 
satisfied smile. Fang started to growl. 

“Already here, Fudge,” he said approvingly. “Good, 
good...” 

“What’re you doin’ here?” said Hagrid furiously. “Get 
outta my house!” 

“My dear man, please believe me, I have no pleasure 
at all in being inside your — er — d’you call this a 
house?” said Lucius Malfoy, sneering as he looked 
around the small cabin. “I simply called at the school 
and was told that the headmaster was here.” 

“And what exactly did you want with me, Lucius?” 
said Dumbledore. He spoke politely, but the fire was 
still blazing in his blue eyes. 



Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“ Dreadful thing, Dumbledore,” said Malfoy lazily, 
taking out a long roll of parchment, “but the 
governors feel it’s time for you to step aside. This is 
an Order of Suspension — you’ll find all twelve 
signatures on it. I’m afraid we feel you’re losing your 
touch. How many attacks have there been now? Two 
more this afternoon, wasn’t it? At this rate, there’ll be 
no Muggle-borns left at Hogwarts, and we all know 
what an awful loss that would be to the school.” 

“Oh, now, see here, Lucius,” said Fudge, looking 
alarmed, “Dumbledore suspended — no, no — last 
thing we want just now — ” 

“The appointment — or suspension — of the 
headmaster is a matter for the governors, Fudge,” 
said Mr. Malfoy smoothly. “And as Dumbledore has 
failed to stop these attacks — ” 

“See here, Malfoy, if Dumbledore can’t stop them,” 
said Fudge, whose upper lip was sweating now, “I 
mean to say, who can?” 

“That remains to be seen,” said Mr. Malfoy with a 
nasty smile. “But as all twelve of us have voted — ” 

Hagrid leapt to his feet, his shaggy black head grazing 
the ceiling. 

“An’ how many did yeh have ter threaten an’ 
blackmail before they agreed, Malfoy, eh?” he roared. 

“Dear, dear, you know, that temper of yours will lead 
you into trouble one of these days, Hagrid,” said Mr. 
Malfoy. “I would advise you not to shout at the 
Azkaban guards like that. They won’t like it at all.” 

“Yeh can’ take Dumbledore!” yelled Hagrid, making 
Fang the boarhound cower and whimper in his 

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




basket. “Take him away, an’ the Muggle-borns won’ 
stand a chance! There’ll be killin’ next!” 

“Calm yourself, Hagrid,” said Dumbledore sharply. He 
looked at Lucius Malfoy. 

“If the governors want my removal, Lucius, I shall of 
course step aside — ” 

“But — ” stuttered Fudge. 

“iVo!” growled Hagrid. 

Dumbledore had not taken his bright blue eyes off 
Lucius Malfoy’s cold gray ones. 

“However,” said Dumbledore, speaking very slowly 
and clearly so that none of them could miss a word, 
“you will find that I will only truly have left this school 
when none here are loyal to me. You will also find 
that help will always be given at Hogwarts to those 
who ask for it.” 

For a second, Harry was almost sure Dumbledore’s 
eyes flickered toward the corner where he and Ron 
stood hidden. 

“Admirable sentiments,” said Malfoy, bowing. “We 
shall all miss your — er — highly individual way of 
running things, Albus, and only hope that your 
successor will manage to prevent any — ah — killins.” 

He strode to the cabin door, opened it, and bowed 
Dumbledore out. Fudge, fiddling with his bowler, 
waited for Hagrid to go ahead of him, but Hagrid 
stood his ground, took a deep breath, and said 
carefully, “If anyone wanted ter find out some stuff, 
all they’d have ter do would be ter follow the spiders. 
That’d lead ’em right! That’s all I’m sayin’.” 

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Fudge stared at him in amazement. 



“All right, I’m cornin’,” said Hagrid, pulling on his 
moleskin overcoat. But as he was about to follow 
Fudge through the door, he stopped again and said 
loudly, “An’ someone’ll need ter feed Fang while I’m 
away.” 

The door banged shut and Ron pulled off the 
Invisibility Cloak. 

“We’re in trouble now,” he said hoarsely. “No 
Dumbledore. They might as well close the school 
tonight. There’ll be an attack a day with him gone.” 

Fang started howling, scratching at the closed door. 



Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






ARAGOG 

Summer was creeping over the grounds around the 
castle; sky and lake alike turned periwinkle blue and 
flowers large as cabbages burst into bloom in the 
greenhouses. But with no Hagrid visible from the 
castle windows, striding the grounds with Fang at his 
heels, the scene didn’t look right to Harry; no better, 
in fact, than the inside of the castle, where things 
were so horribly wrong. 

Harry and Ron had tried to visit Hermione, but 
visitors were now barred from the hospital wing. 

“We’re taking no more chances,” Madam Pomfrey told 
them severely through a crack in the infirmary door. 
“No, I’m sorry, there’s every chance the attacker might 
come back to finish these people off. ...” 

With Dumbledore gone, fear had spread as never 
before, so that the sun warming the castle walls 
outside seemed to stop at the mullioned windows. 
There was barely a face to be seen in the school that 
didn’t look worried and tense, and any laughter that 

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



rang through the corridors sounded shrill and 
unnatural and was quickly stifled. 



Harry constantly repeated Dumbledore’s final words 
to himself. “I will only truly have left this school when 
none here are loyal to me. . . . Help will always be given 
at Hog warts to those who ask for it.” But what good 
were these words? Who exactly were they supposed to 
ask for help, when everyone was just as confused and 
scared as they were? 

Hagrid’s hint about the spiders was far easier to 
understand — the trouble was, there didn’t seem to 
be a single spider left in the castle to follow. Harry 
looked everywhere he went, helped (rather reluctantly) 
by Ron. They were hampered, of course, by the fact 
that they weren’t allowed to wander off on their own 
but had to move around the castle in a pack with the 
other Gryffindors. Most of their fellow students 
seemed glad that they were being shepherded from 
class to class by teachers, but Harry found it very 
irksome. 

One person, however, seemed to be thoroughly 
enjoying the atmosphere of terror and suspicion. 

Draco Malfoy was strutting around the school as 
though he had just been appointed Head Boy. Harry 
didn’t realize what he was so pleased about until the 
Potions lesson about two weeks after Dumbledore and 
Hagrid had left, when, sitting right behind Malfoy, 
Harry overheard him gloating to Crabbe and Goyle. 

“I always thought Father might be the one who got rid 
of Dumbledore,” he said, not troubling to keep his 
voice down. “I told you he thinks Dumbledore’s the 
worst headmaster the school’s ever had. Maybe we’ll 
get a decent headmaster now. Someone who won’t 
want the Chamber of Secrets closed. McGonagall 
won’t last long, she’s only filling in. ...” 

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Snape swept past Harry, making no comment about 
Hermione’s empty seat and cauldron. 

“Sir,” said Malfoy loudly. “Sir, why don’t you apply for 
the headmaster’s job?” 

“Now, now, Malfoy,” said Snape, though he couldn’t 
suppress a thin-lipped smile. “Professor Dumbledore 
has only been suspended by the governors. I daresay 
he’ll be back with us soon enough.” 

“Yeah, right,” said Malfoy, smirking. “I expect you’d 
have Father’s vote, sir, if you wanted to apply for the 
job — I’ll tell Father you’re the best teacher here, sir 



Snape smirked as he swept off around the dungeon, 
fortunately not spotting Seamus Finnigan, who was 
pretending to vomit into his cauldron. 

“I’m quite surprised the Mudbloods haven’t all packed 
their bags by now,” Malfoy went on. “Bet you five 
Galleons the next one dies. Pity it wasn’t Granger — ” 

The bell rang at that moment, which was lucky; at 
Malfoy’s last words, Ron had leapt off his stool, and in 
the scramble to collect bags and books, his attempts 
to reach Malfoy went unnoticed. 

“Let me at him,” Ron growled as Harry and Dean 
hung onto his arms. “I don’t care, I don’t need my 
wand, I’m going to kill him with my bare hands — ” 

“Hurry up, I’ve got to take you all to Herbology,” 
barked Snape over the class’s heads, and off they 
marched, with Harry, Ron, and Dean bringing up the 
rear, Ron still trying to get loose. It was only safe to 
let go of him when Snape had seen them out of the 



Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




castle and they were making their way across the 
vegetable patch toward the greenhouses. 

The Herbology class was very subdued; there were 
now two missing from their number, Justin and 
Hermione. 

Professor Sprout set them all to work pruning the 
Abyssinian Shrivelfigs. Harry went to tip an armful of 
withered stalks onto the compost heap and found 
himself face-to-face with Ernie Macmillan. Ernie took 
a deep breath and said, very formally, “I just want to 
say, Harry, that I’m sorry I ever suspected you. I 
know you’d never attack Hermione Granger, and I 
apologize for all the stuff I said. We’re all in the same 
boat now, and, well — ” 

He held out a pudgy hand, and Harry shook it. 

Ernie and his friend Hannah came to work at the 
same Shrivelfig as Harry and Ron. 

“That Draco Malfoy character,” said Ernie, breaking 
off dead twigs, “he seems very pleased about all this, 
doesn’t he? D’you know, I think he might be 
Slytherin’s heir.” 

“That’s clever of you,” said Ron, who didn’t seem to 
have forgiven Ernie as readily as Harry. 

“Do you think it’s Malfoy, Harry?” Ernie asked. 

“No,” said Harry, so firmly that Ernie and Hannah 
stared. 

A second later, Harry spotted something. 

Several large spiders were scuttling over the ground 
on the other side of the glass, moving in an 

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




unnaturally straight line as though taking the 
shortest route to a prearranged meeting. Harry hit 
Ron over the hand with his pruning shears. 

“Ouch\ What ’re you — ” 

Harry pointed out the spiders, following their progress 
with his eyes screwed up against the sun. 

“Oh, yeah,” said Ron, trying, and failing, to look 
pleased. “But we can’t follow them now — ” 

Ernie and Hannah were listening curiously. 

Harry’s eyes narrowed as he focused on the spiders. If 
they pursued their fixed course, there could be no 
doubt about where they would end up. 

“Looks like they’re heading for the Forbidden Forest. 



And Ron looked even unhappier about that. 

At the end of the lesson Professor Sprout escorted the 
class to their Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson. 
Harry and Ron lagged behind the others so they could 
talk out of earshot. 

“Well have to use the Invisibility Cloak again,” Harry 
told Ron. “We can take Fang with us. He’s used to 
going into the forest with Hagrid, he might be some 
help.” 

“Right,” said Ron, who was twirling his wand 
nervously in his fingers. “Er — aren’t there — aren’t 
there supposed to be werewolves in the forest?” he 
added as they took their usual places at the back of 
Lockhart’s classroom. 



Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Preferring not to answer that question, Harry said, 
“There are good things in there, too. The centaurs are 
all right, and the unicorns ...” 

Ron had never been into the Forbidden Forest before. 
Harry had entered it only once and had hoped never 
to do so again. 

Lockhart bounded into the room and the class stared 
at him. Every other teacher in the place was looking 
grimmer than usual, but Lockhart appeared nothing 
short of buoyant. 

“Come now,” he cried, beaming around him. “Why all 
these long faces?” 

People swapped exasperated looks, but nobody 
answered. 

“Don’t you people realize,” said Lockhart, speaking 
slowly, as though they were all a bit dim, “the danger 
has passed! The culprit has been taken away — ” 

“Says who?” said Dean Thomas loudly. 

“My dear young man, the Minister of Magic wouldn’t 
have taken Hagrid if he hadn’t been one hundred 
percent sure that he was guilty,” said Lockhart, in the 
tone of someone explaining that one and one made 
two. 

“Oh, yes he would,” said Ron, even more loudly than 
Dean. 

“I flatter myself I know a touch more about Hagrid ’s 
arrest than you do, Mr. Weasley,” said Lockhart in a 
self-satisfied tone. 



Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ron started to say that he didn’t think so, somehow, 
but stopped in midsentence when Harry kicked him 
hard under the desk. 



“We weren’t there, remember?” Harry muttered. 

But Lockhart’s disgusting cheeriness, his hints that 
he had always thought Hagrid was no good, his 
confidence that the whole business was now at an 
end, irritated Harry so much that he yearned to throw 
Gadding with Ghouls right in Lockhart’s stupid face. 
Instead he contented himself with scrawling a note to 
Ron: Let’s do it tonight 

Ron read the message, swallowed hard, and looked 
sideways at the empty seat usually filled by 
Hermione. The sight seemed to stiffen his resolve, and 
he nodded. 



The Gryffindor common room was always very 
crowded these days, because from six o’clock onward 
the Gryffindors had nowhere else to go. They also had 
plenty to talk about, with the result that the common 
room often didn’t empty until past midnight. 

Harry went to get the Invisibility Cloak out of his 
trunk right after dinner, and spent the evening sitting 
on it, waiting for the room to clear. Fred and George 
challenged Harry and Ron to a few games of 
Exploding Snap, and Ginny sat watching them, very 
subdued in Hermione ’s usual chair. Harry and Ron 
kept losing on purpose, trying to finish the games 
quickly, but even so, it was well past midnight when 
Fred, George, and Ginny finally went to bed. 

Harry and Ron waited for the distant sounds of two 
dormitory doors closing before seizing the cloak, 

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




throwing it over themselves, and climbing through the 
portrait hole. 

It was another difficult journey through the castle, 
dodging all the teachers. At last they reached the 
entrance hall, slid back the lock on the oak front 
doors, squeezed between them, trying to stop any 
creaking, and stepped out into the moonlit grounds. 

“ ’Course,” said Ron abruptly as they strode across 
the black grass, “we might get to the forest and find 
there’s nothing to follow. Those spiders might not’ve 
been going there at all. I know it looked like they were 
moving in that sort of general direction, but ...” 

His voice trailed away hopefully. 

They reached Hagrid’s house, sad and sorry-looking 
with its blank windows. When Harry pushed the door 
open, Fang went mad with joy at the sight of them. 
Worried he might wake everyone at the castle with his 
deep, booming barks, they hastily fed him treacle 
toffee from a tin on the mantelpiece, which glued his 
teeth together. 

Harry left the Invisibility Cloak on Hagrid’s table. 
There would be no need for it in the pitch-dark forest. 

“C’mon, Fang, we’re going for a walk,” said Harry, 
patting his leg, and Fang bounded happily out of the 
house behind them, dashed to the edge of the forest, 
and lifted his leg against a large sycamore tree. 

Harry took out his wand, murmured, “Lumos\” and a 
tiny light appeared at the end of it, just enough to let 
them watch the path for signs of spiders. 

“Good thinking,” said Ron. “I’d light mine, too, but 
you know — it’d probably blow up or something. ...” 

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry tapped Ron on the shoulder, pointing at the 
grass. Two solitary spiders were hurrying away from 
the wandlight into the shade of the trees. 

“Okay,” Ron sighed as though resigned to the worst, 
“I’m ready. Let’s go.” 

So, with Fang scampering around them, sniffing tree 
roots and leaves, they entered the forest. By the glow 
of Harry’s wand, they followed the steady trickle of 
spiders moving along the path. They walked behind 
them for about twenty minutes, not speaking, 
listening hard for noises other than breaking twigs 
and rustling leaves. Then, when the trees had become 
thicker than ever, so that the stars overhead were no 
longer visible, and Harry’s wand shone alone in the 
sea of dark, they saw their spider guides leaving the 
path. 

Harry paused, trying to see where the spiders were 
going, but everything outside his little sphere of light 
was pitch-black. He had never been this deep into the 
forest before. He could vividly remember Hagrid 
advising him not to leave the forest path last time 
he’d been in here. But Hagrid was miles away now, 
probably sitting in a cell in Azkaban, and he had also 
said to follow the spiders. 

Something wet touched Harry’s hand and he jumped 
backward, crushing Ron’s foot, but it was only Fang’s 
nose. 

“What d’you reckon?” Harry said to Ron, whose eyes 
he could just make out, reflecting the light from his 
wand. 

“We’ve come this far,” said Ron. 



Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




So they followed the darting shadows of the spiders 
into the trees. They couldn’t move very quickly now; 
there were tree roots and stumps in their way, barely 
visible in the near blackness. Harry could feel Fang’s 
hot breath on his hand. More than once, they had to 
stop, so that Harry could crouch down and find the 
spiders in the wandlight. 

They walked for what seemed like at least half an 
hour, their robes snagging on low-slung branches and 
brambles. After a while, they noticed that the ground 
seemed to be sloping downward, though the trees 
were as thick as ever. 

Then Fang suddenly let loose a great, echoing bark, 
making both Harry and Ron jump out of their skins. 

“What?” said Ron loudly, looking around into the 
pitch-dark, and gripping Harry’s elbow very hard. 

“There’s something moving over there,” Harry 
breathed. “Listen ... sounds like something big. ...” 

They listened. Some distance to their right, the 
something big was snapping branches as it carved a 
path through the trees. 

“Oh, no,” said Ron. “Oh, no, oh, no, oh — ” 

“Shut up,” said Harry frantically. “It’ll hear you.” 

“Hear me?” said Ron in an unnaturally high voice. 

“It’s already heard Fang!” 

The darkness seemed to be pressing on their eyeballs 
as they stood, terrified, waiting. There was a strange 
rumbling noise and then silence. 

“What d’you think it’s doing?” said Harry. 

Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Probably getting ready to pounce,” said Ron. 

They waited, shivering, hardly daring to move. 

“D’you think it’s gone?” Harry whispered. 

“Dunno — ” 

Then, to their right, came a sudden blaze of light, so 
bright in the darkness that both of them flung up 
their hands to shield their eyes. Fang yelped and tried 
to run, but got lodged in a tangle of thorns and yelped 
even louder. 

“Harry!” Ron shouted, his voice breaking with relief. 
“Harry, it’s our car!” 

“What?” 

“Come on!” 

Harry blundered after Ron toward the light, stumbling 
and tripping, and a moment later they had emerged 
into a clearing. 

Mr. Weasley’s car was standing, empty, in the middle 
of a circle of thick trees under a roof of dense 
branches, its headlights ablaze. As Ron walked, 
openmouthed, toward it, it moved slowly toward him, 
exactly like a large, turquoise dog greeting its owner. 

“It’s been here all the time!” said Ron delightedly, 
walking around the car. “Look at it. The forest’s 
turned it wild. ...” 

The sides of the car were scratched and smeared with 
mud. Apparently it had taken to trundling around the 
forest on its own. Fang didn’t seem at all keen on it; 
he kept close to Harry, who could feel him quivering. 

Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




His breathing slowing down again, Harry stuffed his 
wand back into his robes. 

“And we thought it was going to attack us!” said Ron, 
leaning against the car and patting it. “I wondered 
where it had gone!” 

Harry squinted around on the floodlit ground for 
signs of more spiders, but they had all scuttled away 
from the glare of the headlights. 

“We’ve lost the trail,” he said. “C’mon, let’s go and find 
them.” 

Ron didn’t speak. He didn’t move. His eyes were fixed 
on a point some ten feet above the forest floor, right 
behind Harry. His face was livid with terror. 

Harry didn’t even have time to turn around. There 
was a loud clicking noise and suddenly he felt 
something long and hairy seize him around the 
middle and lift him off the ground, so that he was 
hanging facedown. Struggling, terrified, he heard 
more clicking, and saw Ron’s legs leave the ground, 
too, heard Fang whimpering and howling — next 
moment, he was being swept away into the dark 
trees. 

Head hanging, Harry saw that what had hold of him 
was marching on six immensely long, hairy legs, the 
front two clutching him tightly below a pair of shining 
black pincers. Behind him, he could hear another of 
the creatures, no doubt carrying Ron. They were 
moving into the very heart of the forest. Harry could 
hear Fang fighting to free himself from a third 
monster, whining loudly, but Harry couldn’t have 
yelled even if he had wanted to; he seemed to have left 
his voice back with the car in the clearing. 



Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




He never knew how long he was in the creature’s 
clutches; he only knew that the darkness suddenly 
lifted enough for him to see that the leaf-strewn 
ground was now swarming with spiders. Craning his 
neck sideways, he realized that they had reached the 
ridge of a vast hollow, a hollow that had been cleared 
of trees, so that the stars shone brightly onto the 
worst scene he had ever laid eyes on. 

Spiders. Not tiny spiders like those surging over the 
leaves below. Spiders the size of carthorses, eight- 
eyed, eight-legged, black, hairy, gigantic. The massive 
specimen that was carrying Harry made its way down 
the steep slope toward a misty, domed web in the very 
center of the hollow, while its fellows closed in all 
around it, clicking their pincers excitedly at the sight 
of its load. 

Harry fell to the ground on all fours as the spider 
released him. Ron and Fang thudded down next to 
him. Fang wasn’t howling anymore, but cowering 
silently on the spot. Ron looked exactly like Harry felt. 
His mouth was stretched wide in a kind of silent 
scream and his eyes were popping. 

Harry suddenly realized that the spider that had 
dropped him was saying something. It had been hard 
to tell, because he clicked his pincers with every word 
he spoke. 

“Aragog!” it called. “Aragog!” 

And from the middle of the misty, domed web, a 
spider the size of a small elephant emerged, very 
slowly. There was gray in the black of his body and 
legs, and each of the eyes on his ugly, pincered head 
was milky white. He was blind. 

“What is it?” he said, clicking his pincers rapidly. 

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Men,” clicked the spider who had caught Harry. 



“Is it Hagrid?” said Aragog, moving closer, his eight 
milky eyes wandering vaguely. 

“Strangers,” clicked the spider who had brought Ron. 
“Kill them,” clicked Aragog fretfully. “I was sleeping. 



“We’re friends of Hagrid ’s,” Harry shouted. His heart 
seemed to have left his chest to pound in his throat. 

Click, click, click went the pincers of the spiders all 
around the hollow. 

Aragog paused. 

“Hagrid has never sent men into our hollow before,” 
he said slowly. 

“Hagrid’s in trouble,” said Harry, breathing very fast. 
“That’s why we’ve come.” 

“In trouble?” said the aged spider, and Harry thought 
he heard concern beneath the clicking pincers. “But 
why has he sent you?” 

Harry thought of getting to his feet but decided 
against it; he didn’t think his legs would support him. 
So he spoke from the ground, as calmly as he could. 

“They think, up at the school, that Hagrid’s been 
setting a — a — something on students. They’ve 
taken him to Azkaban.” 

Aragog clicked his pincers furiously, and all around 
the hollow the sound was echoed by the crowd of 

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




spiders; it was like applause, except applause didn’t 
usually make Harry feel sick with fear. 

“But that was years ago,” said Aragog fretfully. “Years 
and years ago. I remember it well. That’s why they 
made him leave the school. They believed that I was 
the monster that dwells in what they call the 
Chamber of Secrets. They thought that Hagrid had 
opened the Chamber and set me free.” 

“And you ... you didn’t come from the Chamber of 
Secrets?” said Harry, who could feel cold sweat on his 
forehead. 

“I!” said Aragog, clicking angrily. “I was not born in 
the castle. I come from a distant land. A traveler gave 
me to Hagrid when I was an egg. Hagrid was only a 
boy, but he cared for me, hidden in a cupboard in the 
castle, feeding me on scraps from the table. Hagrid is 
my good friend, and a good man. When I was 
discovered, and blamed for the death of a girl, he 
protected me. I have lived here in the forest ever 
since, where Hagrid still visits me. He even found me 
a wife, Mosag, and you see how our family has grown, 
all through Hagrid ’s goodness. ...” 

Harry summoned what remained of his courage. 

“So you never — never attacked anyone?” 

“Never,” croaked the old spider. “It would have been 
my instinct, but out of respect for Hagrid, I never 
harmed a human. The body of the girl who was killed 
was discovered in a bathroom. I never saw any part of 
the castle but the cupboard in which I grew up. Our 
kind like the dark and the quiet. ...” 



Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“But then . . . Do you know what did kill that girl?” 
said Harry. “Because whatever it is, it’s back and 
attacking people again — ” 

His words were drowned by a loud outbreak of 
clicking and the rustling of many long legs shifting 
angrily; large black shapes shifted all around him. 

“The thing that lives in the castle,” said Aragog, “is an 
ancient creature we spiders fear above all others. Well 
do I remember how I pleaded with Hagrid to let me go, 
when I sensed the beast moving about the school.” 

“What is it?” said Harry urgently. 

More loud clicking, more rustling; the spiders seemed 
to be closing in. 

“We do not speak of it!” said Aragog fiercely. “We do 
not name it! I never even told Hagrid the name of that 
dread creature, though he asked me, many times.” 

Harry didn’t want to press the subject, not with the 
spiders pressing closer on all sides. Aragog seemed to 
be tired of talking. He was backing slowly into his 
domed web, but his fellow spiders continued to inch 
slowly toward Harry and Ron. 

“Well just go, then,” Harry called desperately to 
Aragog, hearing leaves rustling behind him. 

“Go?” said Aragog slowly. “I think not. ...” 

“But — but — ” 

“My sons and daughters do not harm Hagrid, on my 
command. But I cannot deny them fresh meat, when 
it wanders so willingly into our midst. Good-bye, 
friend of Hagrid.” 

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry spun around. Feet away, towering above him, 
was a solid wall of spiders, clicking, their many eyes 
gleaming in their ugly black heads. 

Even as he reached for his wand, Harry knew it was 
no good, there were too many of them, but as he tried 
to stand, ready to die fighting, a loud, long note 
sounded, and a blaze of light flamed through the 
hollow. 

Mr. Weasley’s car was thundering down the slope, 
headlights glaring, its horn screeching, knocking 
spiders aside; several were thrown onto their backs, 
their endless legs waving in the air. The car screeched 
to a halt in front of Harry and Ron and the doors flew 
open. 

“Get Fang!” Harry yelled, diving into the front seat; 

Ron seized the boarhound around the middle and 
threw him, yelping, into the back of the car — the 
doors slammed shut — Ron didn’t touch the 
accelerator but the car didn’t need him; the engine 
roared and they were off, hitting more spiders. They 
sped up the slope, out of the hollow, and they were 
soon crashing through the forest, branches whipping 
the windows as the car wound its way cleverly 
through the widest gaps, following a path it obviously 
knew. 

Harry looked sideways at Ron. His mouth was still 
open in the silent scream, but his eyes weren’t 
popping anymore. 

“Are you okay?” 

Ron stared straight ahead, unable to speak. 

They smashed their way through the undergrowth, 
Fang howling loudly in the back seat, and Harry saw 

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




the side mirror snap off as they squeezed past a large 
oak. After ten noisy, rocky minutes, the trees thinned, 
and Harry could again see patches of sky. 

The car stopped so suddenly that they were nearly 
thrown into the windshield. They had reached the 
edge of the forest. Fang flung himself at the window in 
his anxiety to get out, and when Harry opened the 
door, he shot off through the trees to Hagrid’s house, 
tail between his legs. Harry got out too, and after a 
minute or so, Ron seemed to regain the feeling in his 
limbs and followed, still stiff-necked and staring. 

Harry gave the car a grateful pat as it reversed back 
into the forest and disappeared from view. 

Harry went back into Hagrid’s cabin to get the 
Invisibility Cloak. Fang was trembling under a 
blanket in his basket. When Harry got outside again, 
he found Ron being violently sick in the pumpkin 
patch. 

“Follow the spiders,” said Ron weakly, wiping his 
mouth on his sleeve. “I’ll never forgive Hagrid. We’re 
lucky to be alive.” 

“I bet he thought Aragog wouldn’t hurt friends of his,” 
said Harry. 

“That’s exactly Hagrid’s problem!” said Ron, thumping 
the wall of the cabin. “He always thinks monsters 
aren’t as bad as they’re made out, and look where it’s 
got him! A cell in Azkaban!” He was shivering 
uncontrollably now. “What was the point of sending 
us in there? What have we found out, I’d like to 
know?” 

“That Hagrid never opened the Chamber of Secrets,” 
said Harry, throwing the cloak over Ron and prodding 
him in the arm to make him walk. “He was innocent.” 

Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ron gave a loud snort. Evidently, hatching Aragog in 
a cupboard wasn’t his idea of being innocent. 

As the castle loomed nearer Harry twitched the cloak 
to make sure their feet were hidden, then pushed the 
creaking front doors ajar. They walked carefully back 
across the entrance hall and up the marble staircase, 
holding their breath as they passed corridors where 
watchful sentries were walking. At last they reached 
the safety of the Gryffindor common room, where the 
fire had burned itself into glowing ash. They took off 
the cloak and climbed the winding stair to their 
dormitory. 

Ron fell onto his bed without bothering to get 
undressed. Harry, however, didn’t feel very sleepy. He 
sat on the edge of his fourposter, thinking hard about 
everything Aragog had said. 

The creature that was lurking somewhere in the 
castle, he thought, sounded like a sort of monster 
Voldemort — even other monsters didn’t want to 
name it. But he and Ron were no closer to finding out 
what it was, or how it Petrified its victims. Even 
Hagrid had never known what was in the Chamber of 
Secrets. 

Harry swung his legs up onto his bed and leaned 
back against his pillows, watching the moon glinting 
at him through the tower window. 

He couldn’t see what else they could do. They had hit 
dead ends everywhere. Riddle had caught the wrong 
person, the Heir of Slytherin had got off, and no one 
could tell whether it was the same person, or a 
different one, who had opened the Chamber this time. 
There was nobody else to ask. Harry lay down, still 
thinking about what Aragog had said. 



Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




He was becoming drowsy when what seemed like 
their very last hope occurred to him, and he suddenly 
sat bolt upright. 

“Ron,” he hissed through the dark, “Ron — ” 

Ron woke with a yelp like Fang’s, stared wildly 
around, and saw Harry. 

“Ron — that girl who died. Aragog said she was found 
in a bathroom,” said Harry, ignoring Neville’s 
snuffling snores from the corner. “What if she never 
left the bathroom? What if she’s still there?” 

Ron rubbed his eyes, frowning through the moonlight. 
And then he understood, too. 

“You don’t think — not Moaning Myrtle ?” 



Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS 

All those times we were in that bathroom, and she 
was just three toilets away,” said Ron bitterly at 
breakfast next day, “and we could’ve asked her, and 
now ...” 

It had been hard enough trying to look for spiders. 
Escaping their teachers long enough to sneak into a 
girls’ bathroom, the girls’ bathroom, moreover, right 
next to the scene of the first attack, was going to be 
almost impossible. 

But something happened in their first lesson, 
Transfiguration, that drove the Chamber of Secrets 
out of their minds for the first time in weeks. Ten 
minutes into the class, Professor McGonagall told 
them that their exams would start on the first of 
June, one week from today. 

“Exams?” howled Seamus Finnigan. “We’re still 
getting exams?” 



Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



There was a loud bang behind Harry as Neville 
Longbottom’s wand slipped, vanishing one of the legs 
on his desk. Professor McGonagall restored it with a 
wave of her own wand, and turned, frowning, to 
Seamus. 

“The whole point of keeping the school open at this 
time is for you to receive your education,” she said 
sternly. “The exams will therefore take place as usual, 
and I trust you are all studying hard.” 

Studying hard! It had never occurred to Harry that 
there would be exams with the castle in this state. 
There was a great deal of mutinous muttering around 
the room, which made Professor McGonagall scowl 
even more darkly. 

“Professor Dumbledore’s instructions were to keep the 
school running as normally as possible,” she said. 
“And that, I need hardly point out, means finding out 
how much you have learned this year.” 

Harry looked down at the pair of white rabbits he was 
supposed to be turning into slippers. What had he 
learned so far this year? He couldn’t seem to think of 
anything that would be useful in an exam. 

Ron looked as though he’d just been told he had to go 
and live in the Forbidden Forest. 

“Can you imagine me taking exams with this?” he 
asked Harry, holding up his wand, which had just 
started whistling loudly. 

Three days before their first exam, Professor 
McGonagall made another announcement at 
breakfast. 



Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I have good news,” she said, and the Great Hall, 
instead of falling silent, erupted. 

“Dumbledore’s coming back!” several people yelled 
joyfully. 

“You’ve caught the Heir of Slytherin!” squealed a girl 
at the Ravenclaw table. 

“Quidditch matches are back on!” roared Wood 
excitedly. 

When the hubbub had subsided, Professor 
McGonagall said, “Professor Sprout has informed me 
that the Mandrakes are ready for cutting at last. 
Tonight, we will be able to revive those people who 
have been Petrified. I need hardly remind you all that 
one of them may well be able to tell us who, or what, 
attacked them. I am hopeful that this dreadful year 
will end with our catching the culprit.” 

There was an explosion of cheering. Harry looked over 
at the Slytherin table and wasn’t at all surprised to 
see that Draco Malfoy hadn’t joined in. Ron, however, 
was looking happier than he’d looked in days. 

“It won’t matter that we never asked Myrtle, then!” he 
said to Harry. “Hermione’ll probably have all the 
answers when they wake her up! Mind you, she’ll go 
crazy when she finds out we’ve got exams in three 
days’ time. She hasn’t studied. It might be kinder to 
leave her where she is till they’re over.” 

Just then, Ginny Weasley came over and sat down 
next to Ron. She looked tense and nervous, and Harry 
noticed that her hands were twisting in her lap. 

“What’s up?” said Ron, helping himself to more 
porridge. 

Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ginny didn’t say anything, but glanced up and down 
the Gryffindor table with a scared look on her face 
that reminded Harry of someone, though he couldn’t 
think who. 

“Spit it out,” said Ron, watching her. 

Harry suddenly realized who Ginny looked like. She 
was rocking backward and forward slightly in her 
chair, exactly like Dobby did when he was teetering 
on the edge of revealing forbidden information. 

“I’ve got to tell you something,” Ginny mumbled, 
carefully not looking at Harry. 

“What is it?” said Harry. 

Ginny looked as though she couldn’t find the right 
words. 

“What?” said Ron. 

Ginny opened her mouth, but no sound came out. 
Harry leaned forward and spoke quietly, so that only 
Ginny and Ron could hear him. 

“Is it something about the Chamber of Secrets? Have 
you seen something? Someone acting oddly?” 

Ginny drew a deep breath and, at that precise 
moment, Percy Weasley appeared, looking tired and 
wan. 

“If you’ve finished eating, I’ll take that seat, Ginny. I’m 
starving, I’ve only just come off patrol duty.” 

Ginny jumped up as though her chair had just been 
electrified, gave Percy a fleeting, frightened look, and 



Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




scampered away. Percy sat down and grabbed a mug 
from the center of the table. 



“Percy!” said Ron angrily. “She was just about to tell 
us something important!” 

Halfway through a gulp of tea, Percy choked. 

“What sort of thing?” he said, coughing. 

“I just asked her if she’d seen anything odd, and she 
started to say — ” 

“Oh — that — that’s nothing to do with the Chamber 
of Secrets,” said Percy at once. 

“How do you know?” said Ron, his eyebrows raised. 

“Well, er, if you must know, Ginny, er, walked in on 
me the other day when I was — well, never mind — 
the point is, she spotted me doing something and I, 
um, I asked her not to mention it to anybody. I must 
say, I did think she’d keep her word. It’s nothing, 
really, I’d just rather — ” 

Harry had never seen Percy look so uncomfortable. 

“What were you doing, Percy?” said Ron, grinning. 

“Go on, tell us, we won’t laugh.” 

Percy didn’t smile back. 

“Pass me those rolls, Harry, I’m starving.” 

Harry knew the whole mystery might be solved 
tomorrow without their help, but he wasn’t about to 
pass up a chance to speak to Myrtle if it turned up — 
and to his delight it did, midmorning, when they were 
being led to History of Magic by Gilderoy Lockhart. 

Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Lockhart, who had so often assured them that all 
danger had passed, only to be proved wrong right 
away, was now wholeheartedly convinced that it was 
hardly worth the trouble to see them safely down the 
corridors. His hair wasn’t as sleek as usual; it seemed 
he had been up most of the night, patrolling the 
fourth floor. 

“Mark my words,” he said, ushering them around a 
corner. “The first words out of those poor Petrified 
people’s mouths will be ‘It was Hagrid.’ Frankly, I’m 
astounded Professor McGonagall thinks all these 
security measures are necessary.” 

“I agree, sir,” said Harry, making Ron drop his books 
in surprise. 

“Thank you, Harry,” said Lockhart graciously while 
they waited for a long line of Hufflepuffs to pass. “I 
mean, we teachers have quite enough to be getting on 
with, without walking students to classes and 
standing guard all night. ...” 

“That’s right,” said Ron, catching on. “Why don’t you 
leave us here, sir, we’ve only got one more corridor to 
go-” 



“You know, Weasley, I think I will,” said Lockhart. “I 
really should go and prepare my next class — ” 

And he hurried off. 

“Prepare his class,” Ron sneered after him. “Gone to 
curl his hair, more like.” 

They let the rest of the Gryffindors draw ahead of 
them, then darted down a side passage and hurried 
off toward Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. But just as 



Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




they were congratulating each other on their brilliant 
scheme — 

“Potter! Weasley! What are you doing?” 

It was Professor McGonagall, and her mouth was the 
thinnest of thin lines. 

“We were — we were — ” Ron stammered. “We were 
going to — to go and see — ” 

“Hermione,” said Harry. Ron and Professor 
McGonagall both looked at him. 

“We haven’t seen her for ages, Professor,” Harry went 
on hurriedly, treading on Ron’s foot, “and we thought 
we’d sneak into the hospital wing, you know, and tell 
her the Mandrakes are nearly ready and, er, not to 
worry — ” 

Professor McGonagall was still staring at him, and for 
a moment, Harry thought she was going to explode, 
but when she spoke, it was in a strangely croaky 
voice. 

“Of course,” she said, and Harry, amazed, saw a tear 
glistening in her beady eye. “Of course, I realize this 
has all been hardest on the friends of those who have 
been ... I quite understand. Yes, Potter, of course you 
may visit Miss Granger. I will inform Professor Binns 
where you’ve gone. Tell Madam Pomfrey I have given 
my permission.” 

Harry and Ron walked away, hardly daring to believe 
that they’d avoided detention. As they turned the 
corner, they distinctly heard Professor McGonagall 
blow her nose. 



Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“That,” said Ron fervently, “was the best story you’ve 
ever come up with.” 

They had no choice now but to go to the hospital wing 
and tell Madam Pomfrey that they had Professor 
McGonagall’s permission to visit Hermione. 

Madam Pomfrey let them in, but reluctantly. 

“There’s just no point talking to a Petrified person,” 
she said, and they had to admit she had a point when 
they’d taken their seats next to Hermione. It was 
plain that Hermione didn’t have the faintest inkling 
that she had visitors, and that they might just as well 
tell her bedside cabinet not to worry for all the good it 
would do. 

“Wonder if she did see the attacker, though?” said 
Ron, looking sadly at Hermione ’s rigid face. “Because 
if he sneaked up on them all, no one’ll ever know. ...” 

But Harry wasn’t looking at Hermione’s face. He was 
more interested in her right hand. It lay clenched on 
top of her blankets, and bending closer, he saw that a 
piece of paper was scrunched inside her fist. 

Making sure that Madam Pomfrey was nowhere near, 
he pointed this out to Ron. 

“Try and get it out,” Ron whispered, shifting his chair 
so that he blocked Harry from Madam Pomfrey’s view. 

It was no easy task. Hermione’s hand was clamped so 
tightly around the paper that Harry was sure he was 
going to tear it. While Ron kept watch he tugged and 
twisted, and at last, after several tense minutes, the 
paper came free. 



Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




It was a page torn from a very old library book. Harry 
smoothed it out eagerly and Ron leaned close to read 
it, too. 



Of the many fearsome beasts and monsters that roam 
our land, there is none more curious or more deadly 
than the Basilisk, known also as the King of Serpents. 
This snake, which may reach gigantic size and live 
many hundreds of years, is born from a chicken’s egg, 
hatched beneath a toad. Its methods of killing are 
most wondrous, for aside from its deadly and 
venomous fangs, the Basilisk has a murderous stare, 
and all who are fixed with the beam of its eye shall 
suffer instant death. Spiders flee before the Basilisk, 
for it is their mortal enemy, and the Basilisk flees only 
from the crowing of the rooster, which is fatal to it. 

And beneath this, a single word had been written, in 
a hand Harry recognized as Hermione’s. Pipes. 

It was as though somebody had just flicked a light on 
in his brain. 

“Ron,” he breathed. “This is it. This is the answer. The 
monster in the Chamber’s a basilisk — a giant 
serpent! That’s why I’ve been hearing that voice all 
over the place, and nobody else has heard it. It’s 
because I understand Parseltongue. ...” 

Harry looked up at the beds around him. 

“The basilisk kills people by looking at them. But no 
one’s died — because no one looked it straight in the 
eye. Colin saw it through his camera. The basilisk 
burned up all the film inside it, but Colin just got 
Petrified. Justin ... Justin must’ve seen the basilisk 
through Nearly Headless Nick! Nick got the full blast 
Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




of it, but he couldn’t die again ... and Hermione and 
that Ravenclaw prefect were found with a mirror next 
to them. Hermione had just realized the monster was 
a basilisk. I bet you anything she warned the first 
person she met to look around corners with a mirror 
first! And that girl pulled out her mirror — and — ” 

Ron’s jaw had dropped. 

“And Mrs. Norris?” he whispered eagerly. 

Harry thought hard, picturing the scene on the night 
of Halloween. 

“The water ...” he said slowly. “The flood from 
Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. I bet you Mrs. Norris 
only saw the reflection. ...” 

He scanned the page in his hand eagerly. The more 
he looked at it, the more it made sense. 

"... The crowing of the rooster ... is fatal to if!” he read 
aloud. “Hagrid’s roosters were killed! The Heir of 
Slytherin didn’t want one anywhere near the castle 
once the Chamber was opened! Spiders flee before it\ 

It all fits!” 

“But how’s the basilisk been getting around the 
place?” said Ron. “A giant snake ... Someone would’ve 
seen ...” 

Harry, however, pointed at the word Hermione had 
scribbled at the foot of the page. 

“Pipes,” he said. “Pipes ... Ron, it’s been using the 
plumbing. I’ve been hearing that voice inside the 
walls. ...” 

Ron suddenly grabbed Harry’s arm. 

Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“The entrance to the Chamber of Secrets!” he said 
hoarsely. “What if it’s a bathroom? What if it’s in — ” 

“ — Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom,” said Harry. 

They sat there, excitement coursing through them, 
hardly able to believe it. 

“This means,” said Harry, “I can’t be the only 
Parselmouth in the school. The Heir of Slytherin’s 
one, too. That’s how he’s been controlling the 
basilisk.” 

“What’re we going to do?” said Ron, whose eyes were 
flashing. “Should we go straight to McGonagall?” 

“Let’s go to the staffroom,” said Harry, jumping up. 
“She’ll be there in ten minutes. It’s nearly break.” 

They ran downstairs. Not wanting to be discovered 
hanging around in another corridor, they went 
straight into the deserted staffroom. It was a large, 
paneled room full of dark, wooden chairs. Harry and 
Ron paced around it, too excited to sit down. 

But the bell to signal break never came. 

Instead, echoing through the corridors came Professor 
McGonagall’s voice, magically magnified. 

“All students to return to their House dormitories at 
once. All teachers return to the staffroom. Immediately, 
please.” 

Harry wheeled around to stare at Ron. 

“Not another attack? Not now?” 



Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“What’ll we do?” said Ron, aghast. “Go back to the 
dormitory?” 

“No,” said Harry, glancing around. There was an ugly 
sort of wardrobe to his left, full of the teachers’ 
cloaks. “In here. Let’s hear what it’s all about. Then 
we can tell them what we’ve found out.” 

They hid themselves inside it, listening to the 
rumbling of hundreds of people moving overhead, and 
the staffroom door banging open. From between the 
musty folds of the cloaks, they watched the teachers 
filtering into the room. Some of them were looking 
puzzled, others downright scared. Then Professor 
McGonagall arrived. 

“It has happened,” she told the silent staffroom. “A 
student has been taken by the monster. Right into 
the Chamber itself.” 

Professor Flitwick let out a squeal. Professor Sprout 
clapped her hands over her mouth. Snape gripped the 
back of a chair very hard and said, “How can you be 
sure?” 

“The Heir of Slytherin,” said Professor McGonagall, 
who was very white, “left another message. Right 
underneath the first one. ‘Her skeleton will lie in the 
Chamber forever.’ ” 

Professor Flitwick burst into tears. 

“Who is it?” said Madam Hooch, who had sunk, weak- 
kneed, into a chair. “Which student?” 

“Ginny Weasley,” said Professor McGonagall. 

Harry felt Ron slide silently down onto the wardrobe 
floor beside him. 

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“We shall have to send all the students home 
tomorrow,” said Professor McGonagall. “This is the 
end of Hogwarts. Dumbledore always said ...” 

The staffroom door banged open again. For one wild 
moment, Harry was sure it would be Dumbledore. 

But it was Lockhart, and he was beaming. 

“So sorry — dozed off — what have I missed?” 

He didn’t seem to notice that the other teachers were 
looking at him with something remarkably like 
hatred. Snape stepped forward. 

“Just the man,” he said. “The very man. A girl has 
been snatched by the monster, Lockhart. Taken into 
the Chamber of Secrets itself. Your moment has come 
at last.” 

Lockhart blanched. 

“That’s right, Gilderoy,” chipped in Professor Sprout. 
“Weren’t you saying just last night that you’ve known 
all along where the entrance to the Chamber of 
Secrets is?” 

“I — well, I — ” sputtered Lockhart. 

“Yes, didn’t you tell me you were sure you knew what 
was inside it?” piped up Professor Flitwick. 

“D-did I? I don’t recall — ” 

“I certainly remember you saying you were sorry you 
hadn’t had a crack at the monster before Hagrid was 
arrested,” said Snape. “Didn’t you say that the whole 
affair had been bungled, and that you should have 
been given a free rein from the first?” 



Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Lockhart stared around at his stony-faced colleagues. 



“I — I really never — you may have misunderstood — ” 

“Well leave it to you, then, Gilderoy,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “Tonight will be an excellent time to do 
it. Well make sure everyone’s out of your way. You’ll 
be able to tackle the monster all by yourself. A free 
rein at last.” 

Lockhart gazed desperately around him, but nobody 
came to the rescue. He didn’t look remotely handsome 
anymore. His lip was trembling, and in the absence of 
his usually toothy grin, he looked weak-chinned and 
feeble. 

“V-very well,” he said. “I’ll — I’ll be in my office, 
getting — getting ready.” 

And he left the room. 

“Right,” said Professor McGonagall, whose nostrils 
were flared, “that’s got him out from under our feet. 
The Heads of Houses should go and inform their 
students what has happened. Tell them the Hogwarts 
Express will take them home first thing tomorrow. 

Will the rest of you please make sure no students 
have been left outside their dormitories.” 

The teachers rose and left, one by one. 



It was probably the worst day of Harry’s entire life. 

He, Ron, Fred, and George sat together in a corner of 
the Gryffindor common room, unable to say anything 
to each other. Percy wasn’t there. He had gone to 
send an owl to Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, then shut 
himself up in his dormitory. 

Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




No afternoon ever lasted as long as that one, nor had 
Gryffindor Tower ever been so crowded, yet so quiet. 
Near sunset, Fred and George went up to bed, unable 
to sit there any longer. 

“She knew something, Harry,” said Ron, speaking for 
the first time since they had entered the wardrobe in 
the staffroom. “That’s why she was taken. It wasn’t 
some stupid thing about Percy at all. She’d found out 
something about the Chamber of Secrets. That must 
be why she was — ” Ron rubbed his eyes frantically. “I 
mean, she was a pureblood. There can’t be any other 
reason.” 

Harry could see the sun sinking, blood-red, below the 
skyline. This was the worst he had ever felt. If only 
there was something they could do. Anything. 

“Harry,” said Ron. “D’you think there’s any chance at 
all she’s not — you know — ” 

Harry didn’t know what to say. He couldn’t see how 
Ginny could still be alive. 

“D’you know what?” said Ron. “I think we should go 
and see Lockhart. Tell him what we know. He’s going 
to try and get into the Chamber. We can tell him 
where we think it is, and tell him it’s a basilisk in 
there.” 

Because Harry couldn’t think of anything else to do, 
and because he wanted to be doing something, he 
agreed. The Gryffindors around them were so 
miserable, and felt so sorry for the Weasleys, that 
nobody tried to stop them as they got up, crossed the 
room, and left through the portrait hole. 

Darkness was falling as they walked down to 
Lockhart’s office. There seemed to be a lot of activity 

Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




going on inside it. They could hear scraping, thumps, 
and hurried footsteps. 

Harry knocked and there was a sudden silence from 
inside. Then the door opened the tiniest crack and 
they saw one of Lockhart’s eyes peering through it. 

“Oh — Mr. Potter — Mr. Weasley — ” he said, opening 
the door a bit wider. “I’m rather busy at the moment 
— if you would be quick — ” 

“Professor, we’ve got some information for you,” said 
Harry. “We think it’ll help you.” 

“Er — well — it’s not terribly — ” The side of 
Lockhart’s face that they could see looked very 
uncomfortable. “I mean — well — all right — ” 

He opened the door and they entered. 

His office had been almost completely stripped. Two 
large trunks stood open on the floor. Robes, jade- 
green, lilac, midnight-blue, had been hastily folded 
into one of them; books were jumbled untidily into 
the other. The photographs that had covered the walls 
were now crammed into boxes on the desk. 

“Are you going somewhere?” said Harry. 

“Er, well, yes,” said Lockhart, ripping a life-size poster 
of himself from the back of the door as he spoke and 
starting to roll it up. “Urgent call — unavoidable — 
got to go — ” 

“What about my sister?” said Ron jerkily. 

“Well, as to that — most unfortunate — ” said 
Lockhart, avoiding their eyes as he wrenched open a 



Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




drawer and started emptying the contents into a bag. 
“No one regrets more than I — ” 

“You’re the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher!” 
said Harry. “You can’t go now! Not with all the Dark 
stuff going on here!” 

“Well — I must say — when I took the job — ” 
Lockhart muttered, now piling socks on top of his 
robes, “nothing in the job description — didn’t expect 



“You mean you’re running away? said Harry 
disbelievingly. “After all that stuff you did in your 
books — ” 

“Books can be misleading,” said Lockhart delicately. 

“You wrote them!” Harry shouted. 

“My dear boy,” said Lockhart, straightening up and 
frowning at Harry. “Do use your common sense. My 
books wouldn’t have sold half as well if people didn’t 
think I’d done all those things. No one wants to read 
about some ugly old Armenian warlock, even if he did 
save a village from werewolves. He’d look dreadful on 
the front cover. No dress sense at all. And the witch 
who banished the Bandon Banshee had a hairy chin. 

I mean, come on — ” 

“So you’ve just been taking credit for what a load of 
other people have done?” said Harry incredulously. 

“Harry, Harry,” said Lockhart, shaking his head 
impatiently, “it’s not nearly as simple as that. There 
was work involved. I had to track these people down. 
Ask them exactly how they managed to do what they 
did. Then I had to put a Memory Charm on them so 
they wouldn’t remember doing it. If there’s one thing I 
Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




pride myself on, it’s my Memory Charms. No, it’s been 
a lot of work, Harry. It’s not all book signings and 
publicity photos, you know. You want fame, you have 
to be prepared for a long hard slog.” 

He banged the lids of his trunks shut and locked 
them. 

“Let’s see,” he said. “I think that’s everything. Yes. 
Only one thing left.” 

He pulled out his wand and turned to them. 

“Awfully sorry, boys, but I’ll have to put a Memory 
Charm on you now. Can’t have you blabbing my 
secrets all over the place. I’d never sell another book 



Harry reached his wand just in time. Lockhart had 
barely raised his, when Harry bellowed, 

“ Expelliarmus\ ” 

Lockhart was blasted backward, falling over his 
trunk; his wand flew high into the air; Ron caught it, 
and flung it out of the open window. 

“Shouldn’t have let Professor Snape teach us that 
one,” said Harry furiously, kicking Lockhart’s trunk 
aside. Lockhart was looking up at him, feeble once 
more. Harry was still pointing his wand at him. 

“What d’you want me to do?” said Lockhart weakly. “I 
don’t know where the Chamber of Secrets is. There’s 
nothing I can do.” 

“You’re in luck,” said Harry, forcing Lockhart to his 
feet at wandpoint. “We think we know where it is. 
And what’s inside it. Let’s go.” 



Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




They marched Lockhart out of his office and down the 
nearest stairs, along the dark corridor where the 
messages shone on the wall, to the door of Moaning 
Myrtle’s bathroom. 

They sent Lockhart in first. Harry was pleased to see 
that he was shaking. 

Moaning Myrtle was sitting on the tank of the end 
toilet. 

“Oh, it’s you,” she said when she saw Harry. “What do 
you want this time?” 

“To ask you how you died,” said Harry. 

Myrtle’s whole aspect changed at once. She looked as 
though she had never been asked such a flattering 
question. 

“Ooooh, it was dreadful,” she said with relish. “It 
happened right in here. I died in this very stall. I 
remember it so well. I’d hidden because Olive Hornby 
was teasing me about my glasses. The door was 
locked, and I was crying, and then I heard somebody 
come in. They said something funny. A different 
language, I think it must have been. Anyway, what 
really got me was that it was a boy speaking. So I 
unlocked the door, to tell him to go and use his own 
toilet, and then — ” Myrtle swelled importantly, her 
face shining. “I died.” 

“How?” said Harry. 

“No idea,” said Myrtle in hushed tones. “I just 
remember seeing a pair of great, big, yellow eyes. My 
whole body sort of seized up, and then I was floating 
away. ...” She looked dreamily at Harry. “And then I 
came back again. I was determined to haunt Olive 
Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Hornby, you see. Oh, she was sorry she’d ever 
laughed at my glasses.” 

“Where exactly did you see the eyes?” said Harry. 

“Somewhere there,” said Myrtle, pointing vaguely 
toward the sink in front of her toilet. 

Harry and Ron hurried over to it. Lockhart was 
standing well back, a look of utter terror on his face. 

It looked like an ordinary sink. They examined every 
inch of it, inside and out, including the pipes below. 
And then Harry saw it: Scratched on the side of one of 
the copper taps was a tiny snake. 

“That tap’s never worked,” said Myrtle brightly as he 
tried to turn it. 

“Harry,” said Ron. “Say something. Something in 
Parseltongue.” 

“But — ” Harry thought hard. The only times he’d ever 
managed to speak Parseltongue were when he’d been 
faced with a real snake. He stared hard at the tiny 
engraving, trying to imagine it was real. 

“Open up,” he said. 

He looked at Ron, who shook his head. 

“English,” he said. 

Harry looked back at the snake, willing himself to 
believe it was alive. If he moved his head, the 
candlelight made it look as though it were moving. 

“Open up,” he said. 



Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Except that the words weren’t what he heard; a 
strange hissing had escaped him, and at once the tap 
glowed with a brilliant white light and began to spin. 
Next second, the sink began to move; the sink, in fact, 
sank, right out of sight, leaving a large pipe exposed, 
a pipe wide enough for a man to slide into. 

Harry heard Ron gasp and looked up again. He had 
made up his mind what he was going to do. 

“I’m going down there,” he said. 

He couldn’t not go, not now they had found the 
entrance to the Chamber, not if there was even the 
faintest, slimmest, wildest chance that Ginny might 
be alive. 

“Me too,” said Ron. 

There was a pause. 

“Well, you hardly seem to need me,” said Lockhart, 
with a shadow of his old smile. “I’ll just — ” 

He put his hand on the door knob, but Ron and Harry 
both pointed their wands at him. 

“You can go first,” Ron snarled. 

White-faced and wandless, Lockhart approached the 
opening. 

“Boys,” he said, his voice feeble. “Boys, what good will 
it do?” 

Harry jabbed him in the back with his wand. 

Lockhart slid his legs into the pipe. 



Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I really don’t think — ” he started to say, but Ron 
gave him a push, and he slid out of sight. Harry 
followed quickly. He lowered himself slowly into the 
pipe, then let go. 

It was like rushing down an endless, slimy, dark 
slide. He could see more pipes branching off in all 
directions, but none as large as theirs, which twisted 
and turned, sloping steeply downward, and he knew 
that he was falling deeper below the school than even 
the dungeons. Behind him he could hear Ron, 
thudding slightly at the curves. 

And then, just as he had begun to worry about what 
would happen when he hit the ground, the pipe 
leveled out, and he shot out of the end with a wet 
thud, landing on the damp floor of a dark stone 
tunnel large enough to stand in. Lockhart was getting 
to his feet a little ways away, covered in slime and 
white as a ghost. Harry stood aside as Ron came 
whizzing out of the pipe, too. 

“We must be miles under the school,” said Harry, his 
voice echoing in the black tunnel. 

“Under the lake, probably,” said Ron, squinting 
around at the dark, slimy walls. 

All three of them turned to stare into the darkness 
ahead. 

“Lumosl” Harry muttered to his wand and it lit again. 
“C’mon,” he said to Ron and Lockhart, and off they 
went, their footsteps slapping loudly on the wet floor. 

The tunnel was so dark that they could only see a 
little distance ahead. Their shadows on the wet walls 
looked monstrous in the wandlight. 



Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Remember,” Harry said quietly as they walked 
cautiously forward, “any sign of movement, close your 
eyes right away. ...” 

But the tunnel was quiet as the grave, and the first 
unexpected sound they heard was a loud crunch as 
Ron stepped on what turned out to be a rat’s skull. 
Harry lowered his wand to look at the floor and saw 
that it was littered with small animal bones. Trying 
very hard not to imagine what Ginny might look like if 
they found her, Harry led the way forward, around a 
dark bend in the tunnel. 

“Harry — there’s something up there — ” said Ron 
hoarsely, grabbing Harry’s shoulder. 

They froze, watching. Harry could just see the outline 
of something huge and curved, lying right across the 
tunnel. It wasn’t moving. 

“Maybe it’s asleep,” he breathed, glancing back at the 
other two. Lockhart’s hands were pressed over his 
eyes. Harry turned back to look at the thing, his heart 
beating so fast it hurt. 

Very slowly, his eyes as narrow as he could make 
them and still see, Harry edged forward, his wand 
held high. 

The light slid over a gigantic snake skin, of a vivid, 
poisonous green, lying curled and empty across the 
tunnel floor. The creature that had shed it must have 
been twenty feet long at least. 

“Blimey,” said Ron weakly. 

There was a sudden movement behind them. Gilderoy 
Lockhart’s knees had given way. 



Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Get up,” said Ron sharply, pointing his wand at 
Lockhart. 

Lockhart got to his feet — then he dived at Ron, 
knocking him to the ground. 

Harry jumped forward, but too late — Lockhart was 
straightening up, panting, Ron’s wand in his hand 
and a gleaming smile back on his face. 

“The adventure ends here, boys!” he said. “I shall take 
a bit of this skin back up to the school, tell them I 
was too late to save the girl, and that you two 
tragically lost your minds at the sight of her mangled 
body — say good-bye to your memories!” 

He raised Ron’s Spellotaped wand high over his head 
and yelled, “Obliviatel” 

The wand exploded with the force of a small bomb. 
Harry flung his arms over his head and ran, slipping 
over the coils of snake skin, out of the way of great 
chunks of tunnel ceiling that were thundering to the 
floor. Next moment, he was standing alone, gazing at 
a solid wall of broken rock. 

“Ron!” he shouted. “Are you okay? Ron!” 

“I’m here!” came Ron’s muffled voice from behind the 
rock-fall. “I’m okay — this git’s not, though — he got 
blasted by the wand — ” 

There was a dull thud and a loud “ow!” It sounded as 
though Ron had just kicked Lockhart in the shins. 

“What now?” Ron’s voice said, sounding desperate. 
“We can’t get through — it’ll take ages. ...” 



Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry looked up at the tunnel ceiling. Huge cracks 
had appeared in it. He had never tried to break apart 
anything as large as these rocks by magic, and now 
didn’t seem a good moment to try — what if the whole 
tunnel caved in? 

There was another thud and another “ow!” from 
behind the rocks. They were wasting time. Ginny had 
already been in the Chamber of Secrets for hours. ... 
Harry knew there was only one thing to do. 

“Wait there,” he called to Ron. “Wait with Lockhart. I’ll 
go on. ... If I’m not back in an hour ...” 

There was a very pregnant pause. 

“I’ll try and shift some of this rock,” said Ron, who 
seemed to be trying to keep his voice steady. “So you 
can — can get back through. And, Harry — ” 

“See you in a bit,” said Harry, trying to inject some 
confidence into his shaking voice. 

And he set off alone past the giant snake skin. 

Soon the distant noise of Ron straining to shift the 
rocks was gone. The tunnel turned and turned again. 
Every nerve in Harry’s body was tingling 
unpleasantly. He wanted the tunnel to end, yet 
dreaded what he’d find when it did. And then, at last, 
as he crept around yet another bend, he saw a solid 
wall ahead on which two entwined serpents were 
carved, their eyes set with great, glinting emeralds. 

Harry approached, his throat very dry. There was no 
need to pretend these stone snakes were real; their 
eyes looked strangely alive. 



Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




He could guess what he had to do. He cleared his 
throat, and the emerald eyes seemed to flicker. 

“Open,” said Harry, in a low, faint hiss. 

The serpents parted as the wall cracked open, the 
halves slid smoothly out of sight, and Harry, shaking 
from head to foot, walked inside. 



Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






THE HEIR OF SLYTHERIN 

He was standing at the end of a very long, dimly lit 
chamber. Towering stone pillars entwined with more 
carved serpents rose to support a ceiling lost in 
darkness, casting long, black shadows through the 
odd, greenish gloom that filled the place. 

His heart beating very fast, Harry stood listening to 
the chill silence. Could the basilisk be lurking in a 
shadowy corner, behind a pillar? And where was 
Ginny? 

He pulled out his wand and moved forward between 
the serpentine columns. Every careful footstep echoed 
loudly off the shadowy walls. He kept his eyes 
narrowed, ready to clamp them shut at the smallest 
sign of movement. The hollow eye sockets of the stone 
snakes seemed to be following him. More than once, 
with a jolt of the stomach, he thought he saw one stir. 

Then, as he drew level with the last pair of pillars, a 
statue high as the Chamber itself loomed into view, 
standing against the back wall. 

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



Harry had to crane his neck to look up into the giant 
face above: It was ancient and monkeyish, with a 
long, thin beard that fell almost to the bottom of the 
wizard’s sweeping stone robes, where two enormous 
gray feet stood on the smooth Chamber floor. And 
between the feet, facedown, lay a small, black-robed 
figure with flaming-red hair. 

“Ginnyl” Harry muttered, sprinting to her and 
dropping to his knees. “Ginny — don’t be dead — 
please don’t be dead — ” He flung his wand aside, 
grabbed Ginny’s shoulders, and turned her over. Her 
face was white as marble, and as cold, yet her eyes 
were closed, so she wasn’t Petrified. But then she 
must be — 

“Ginny, please wake up,” Harry muttered desperately, 
shaking her. Ginny’s head lolled hopelessly from side 
to side. 

“She won’t wake,” said a soft voice. 

Harry jumped and spun around on his knees. 

A tall, black-haired boy was leaning against the 
nearest pillar, watching. He was strangely blurred 
around the edges, as though Harry were looking at 
him through a misted window. But there was no 
mistaking him — 

“Tom — Tom Riddle?” 

Riddle nodded, not taking his eyes off Harry’s face. 

“What d’you mean, she won’t wake?” Harry said 
desperately. “She’s not — she’s not — ?” 

“She’s still alive,” said Riddle. “But only just.” 



Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stared at him. Tom Riddle had been at 
Hogwarts fifty years ago, yet here he stood, a weird, 
misty light shining about him, not a day older than 
sixteen. 

“Are you a ghost?” Harry said uncertainly. 

“A memory,” said Riddle quietly. “Preserved in a diary 
for fifty years.” 

He pointed toward the floor near the statue’s giant 
toes. Lying open there was the little black diary Harry 
had found in Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. For a 
second, Harry wondered how it had got there — but 
there were more pressing matters to deal with. 

“You’ve got to help me, Tom,” Harry said, raising 
Ginny’s head again. “We’ve got to get her out of here. 
There’s a basilisk ... I don’t know where it is, but it 
could be along any moment. ... Please, help me — ” 

Riddle didn’t move. Harry, sweating, managed to hoist 
Ginny half off the floor, and bent to pick up his wand 
again. 

But his wand had gone. 

“Did you see — ?” 

He looked up. Riddle was still watching him — 
twirling Harry’s wand between his long fingers. 

“Thanks,” said Harry, stretching out his hand for it. 

A smile curled the corners of Riddle’s mouth. He 
continued to stare at Harry, twirling the wand idly. 



Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Listen,” said Harry urgently, his knees sagging with 
Ginny’s dead weight. “We’ve got to go\ If the basilisk 
comes — ” 

“It won’t come until it is called,” said Riddle calmly. 

Harry lowered Ginny back onto the floor, unable to 
hold her up any longer. 

“What d’you mean?” he said. “Look, give me my wand, 
I might need it — ” 

Riddle’s smile broadened. 

“You won’t be needing it,” he said. 

Harry stared at him. 

“What d’you mean, I won’t be — ?” 

“I’ve waited a long time for this, Harry Potter,” said 
Riddle. “For the chance to see you. To speak to you.” 

“Look,” said Harry, losing patience, “I don’t think you 
get it. We’re in the Chamber of Secrets. We can talk 
later — ” 

“We’re going to talk now,” said Riddle, still smiling 
broadly, and he pocketed Harry’s wand. 

Harry stared at him. There was something very funny 
going on here. ... 

“How did Ginny get like this?” he asked slowly. 

“Well, that’s an interesting question,” said Riddle 
pleasantly. “And quite a long story. I suppose the real 
reason Ginny Weasley’s like this is because she 



Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




opened her heart and spilled all her secrets to an 
invisible stranger.” 

“What are you talking about?” said Harry. 

“The diary,” said Riddle. “My diary. Little Ginny’s been 
writing in it for months and months, telling me all her 
pitiful worries and woes — how her brothers tease 
her, how she had to come to school with secondhand 
robes and books, how” — Riddle’s eyes glinted — 

“how she didn’t think famous, good, great Harry 
Potter would ever like her. ...” 

All the time he spoke, Riddle’s eyes never left Harry’s 
face. There was an almost hungry look in them. 

“It’s very boring, having to listen to the silly little 
troubles of an eleven-year-old girl,” he went on. “But I 
was patient. I wrote back. I was sympathetic, I was 
kind. Ginny simply loved me. No one’s ever 
understood me like you, Tom. ... I’m so glad I’ve got 
this diary to confide in. ... It’s like having a friend I can 
carry around in my pocket. ...” 

Riddle laughed, a high, cold laugh that didn’t suit 
him. It made the hairs stand up on the back of 
Harry’s neck. 

“If I say it myself, Harry, I’ve always been able to 
charm the people I needed. So Ginny poured out her 
soul to me, and her soul happened to be exactly what 
I wanted. ... I grew stronger and stronger on a diet of 
her deepest fears, her darkest secrets. I grew 
powerful, far more powerful than little Miss Weasley. 
Powerful enough to start feeding Miss Weasley a few 
of my secrets, to start pouring a little of my soul back 
into her ...” 



Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“What d’you mean?” said Harry, whose mouth had 
gone very dry. 

“Haven’t you guessed yet, Harry Potter?” said Riddle 
softly. “Ginny Weasley opened the Chamber of 
Secrets. She strangled the school roosters and 
daubed threatening messages on the walls. She set 
the Serpent of Slytherin on four Mudbloods, and the 
Squib’s cat.” 

“No,” Harry whispered. 

“Yes,” said Riddle, calmly. “Of course, she didn’t know 
what she was doing at first. It was very amusing. I 
wish you could have seen her new diary entries . . . far 
more interesting, they became. ... Dear Tom,” he 
recited, watching Harry’s horrified face, “7 think I’m 
losing my memory. There are rooster feathers all over 
my robes and I don’t know how they got there. Dear 
Tom, I can’t remember what I did on the night of 
Halloween, but a cat was attacked and I’ve got paint 
all down my front. Dear Tom, Percy keeps telling me 
I’m pale and I’m not myself. I think he suspects me. . . . 
There was another attack today and I don’t know 
where I was. Tom, what am I going to do? I think I’m 
going mad. ... I think I’m the one attacking everyone, 
Tom\” 

Harry’s fists were clenched, the nails digging deep 
into his palms. 

“It took a very long time for stupid little Ginny to stop 
trusting her diary,” said Riddle. “But she finally 
became suspicious and tried to dispose of it. And 
that’s where you came in, Harry. You found it, and I 
couldn’t have been more delighted. Of all the people 
who could have picked it up, it was you, the very 
person I was most anxious to meet. ...” 



Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“And why did you want to meet me?” said Harry. 

Anger was coursing through him, and it was an effort 
to keep his voice steady. 

“Well, you see, Ginny told me all about you, Harry,” 
said Riddle. “Your whole fascinating history.” His eyes 
roved over the lightning scar on Harry’s forehead, and 
their expression grew hungrier. “I knew I must find 
out more about you, talk to you, meet you if I could. 
So I decided to show you my famous capture of that 
great oaf, Hagrid, to gain your trust — ” 

“Hagrid’s my friend,” said Harry, his voice now 
shaking. “And you framed him, didn’t you? I thought 
you made a mistake, but — ” 

Riddle laughed his high laugh again. 

“It was my word against Hagrid’s, Harry. Well, you 
can imagine how it looked to old Armando Dippet. On 
the one hand, Tom Riddle, poor but brilliant, 
parentless but so brave, school prefect, model student 
... on the other hand, big, blundering Hagrid, in 
trouble every other week, trying to raise werewolf 
cubs under his bed, sneaking off to the Forbidden 
Forest to wrestle trolls ... but I admit, even / was 
surprised how well the plan worked. I thought 
someone must realize that Hagrid couldn’t possibly be 
the Heir of Slytherin. It had taken me five whole years 
to find out everything I could about the Chamber of 
Secrets and discover the secret entrance ... as though 
Hagrid had the brains, or the power! 

“Only the Transfiguration teacher, Dumbledore, 
seemed to think Hagrid was innocent. He persuaded 
Dippet to keep Hagrid and train him as gamekeeper. 
Yes, I think Dumbledore might have guessed. ... 
Dumbledore never seemed to like me as much as the 
other teachers did. ...” 

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“I bet Dumbledore saw right through you,” said 
Harry, his teeth gritted. 

“Well, he certainly kept an annoyingly close watch on 
me after Hagrid was expelled,” said Riddle carelessly. 
“I knew it wouldn’t be safe to open the Chamber again 
while I was still at school. But I wasn’t going to waste 
those long years I’d spent searching for it. I decided to 
leave behind a diary, preserving my sixteen-year-old 
self in its pages, so that one day, with luck, I would 
be able to lead another in my footsteps, and finish 
Salazar Slytherin’s noble work.” 

“Well, you haven’t finished it,” said Harry 
triumphantly. “No one’s died this time, not even the 
cat. In a few hours the Mandrake Draught will be 
ready and everyone who was Petrified will be all right 
again — ” 

“Haven’t I already told you,” said Riddle quietly, “that 
killing Mudbloods doesn’t matter to me anymore? For 
many months now, my new target has been — you.” 

Harry stared at him. 

“Imagine how angry I was when the next time my 
diary was opened, it was Ginny who was writing to 
me, not you. She saw you with the diary, you see, and 
panicked. What if you found out how to work it, and I 
repeated all her secrets to you? What if, even worse, I 
told you who’d been strangling roosters? So the 
foolish little brat waited until your dormitory was 
deserted and stole it back. But I knew what I must 
do. It was clear to me that you were on the trail of 
Slytherin’s heir. From everything Ginny had told me 
about you, I knew you would go to any lengths to 
solve the mystery — particularly if one of your best 
friends was attacked. And Ginny had told me the 



Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




whole school was buzzing because you could speak 
Parseltongue. ... 

“So I made Ginny write her own farewell on the wall 
and come down here to wait. She struggled and cried 
and became very boring. But there isn’t much life left 
in her. ... She put too much into the diary, into me. 
Enough to let me leave its pages at last. ... I have 
been waiting for you to appear since we arrived here. I 
knew you’d come. I have many questions for you, 
Harry Potter.” 

“Like what?” Harry spat, fists still clenched. 

“Well,” said Riddle, smiling pleasantly, “how is it that 
you — a skinny boy with no extraordinary magical 
talent — managed to defeat the greatest wizard of all 
time? How did you escape with nothing but a scar, 
while Lord Voldemort’s powers were destroyed?” 

There was an odd red gleam in his hungry eyes now. 

“Why do you care how I escaped?” said Harry slowly. 
“Voldemort was after your time. ...” 

“Voldemort,” said Riddle softly, “is my past, present, 
and future, Harry Potter. ...” 

He pulled Harry’s wand from his pocket and began to 
trace it through the air, writing three shimmering 
words: 

tom marvolo riddle 

Then he waved the wand once, and the letters of his 
name rearranged themselves: 

i am lord voldemort 



Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“You see?” he whispered. “It was a name I was already 
using at Hogwarts, to my most intimate friends only, 
of course. You think I was going to use my filthy 
Muggle father’s name forever? I, in whose veins runs 
the blood of Salazar Slytherin himself, through my 
mother’s side? I, keep the name of a foul, common 
Muggle, who abandoned me even before I was born, 
just because he found out his wife was a witch? No, 
Harry — I fashioned myself a new name, a name I 
knew wizards everywhere would one day fear to 
speak, when I had become the greatest sorcerer in the 
world!” 

Harry’s brain seemed to have jammed. He stared 
numbly at Riddle, at the orphaned boy who had 
grown up to murder Harry’s own parents, and so 
many others. ... At last he forced himself to speak. 

“You’re not,” he said, his quiet voice full of hatred. 

“Not what?” snapped Riddle. 

“Not the greatest sorcerer in the world,” said Harry, 
breathing fast. “Sorry to disappoint you and all that, 
but the greatest wizard in the world is Albus 
Dumbledore. Everyone says so. Even when you were 
strong, you didn’t dare try and take over at Hogwarts. 
Dumbledore saw through you when you were at 
school and he still frightens you now, wherever you’re 
hiding these days — ” 

The smile had gone from Riddle’s face, to be replaced 
by a very ugly look. 

“Dumbledore ’s been driven out of this castle by the 
mere memory of me!” he hissed. 



Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“He’s not as gone as you might think!” Harry retorted. 
He was speaking at random, wanting to scare Riddle, 
wishing rather than believing it to be true — 

Riddle opened his mouth, but froze. 

Music was coming from somewhere. Riddle whirled 
around to stare down the empty Chamber. The music 
was growing louder. It was eerie, spine-tingling, 
unearthly; it lifted the hair on Harry’s scalp and made 
his heart feel as though it was swelling to twice its 
normal size. Then, as the music reached such a pitch 
that Harry felt it vibrating inside his own ribs, flames 
erupted at the top of the nearest pillar. 

A crimson bird the size of a swan had appeared, 
piping its weird music to the vaulted ceiling. It had a 
glittering golden tail as long as a peacock’s and 
gleaming golden talons, which were gripping a ragged 
bundle. 

A second later, the bird was flying straight at Harry. It 
dropped the ragged thing it was carrying at his feet, 
then landed heavily on his shoulder. As it folded its 
great wings, Harry looked up and saw it had a long, 
sharp golden beak and a beady black eye. 

The bird stopped singing. It sat still and warm next to 
Harry’s cheek, gazing steadily at Riddle. 

“That’s a phoenix. ...” said Riddle, staring shrewdly 
back at it. 

“Fawkes?” Harry breathed, and he felt the bird’s 
golden claws squeeze his shoulder gently. 

“And that — ” said Riddle, now eyeing the ragged thing 
that Fawkes had dropped, “that’s the old school 
Sorting Hat — ” 

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




So it was. Patched, frayed, and dirty, the hat lay 
motionless at Harry’s feet. 

Riddle began to laugh again. He laughed so hard that 
the dark Chamber rang with it, as though ten Riddles 
were laughing at once — 

“This is what Dumbledore sends his defender! A 
songbird and an old hat! Do you feel brave, Harry 
Potter? Do you feel safe now?” 

Harry didn’t answer. He might not see what use 
Fawkes or the Sorting Hat were, but he was no longer 
alone, and he waited for Riddle to stop laughing with 
his courage mounting. 

“To business, Harry,” said Riddle, still smiling 
broadly. “Twice — in your past, in my future — we 
have met. And twice I failed to kill you. How did you 
survive ? Tell me everything. The longer you talk,” he 
added softly, “the longer you stay alive.” 

Harry was thinking fast, weighing his chances. Riddle 
had the wand. He, Harry, had Fawkes and the Sorting 
Hat, neither of which would be much good in a duel. 

It looked bad, all right . . . but the longer Riddle stood 
there, the more life was dwindling out of Ginny ... and 
in the meantime, Harry noticed suddenly, Riddle’s 
outline was becoming clearer, more solid. ... If it had 
to be a fight between him and Riddle, better sooner 
than later. 

“No one knows why you lost your powers when you 
attacked me,” said Harry abruptly. “I don’t know 
myself. But I know why you couldn’t kill me. Because 
my mother died to save me. My common Muggle-born 
mother,” he added, shaking with suppressed rage. 
“She stopped you killing me. And I’ve seen the real 
you, I saw you last year. You’re a wreck. You’re barely 
Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




alive. That’s where all your power got you. You’re in 
hiding. You’re ugly, you’re foul — ” 

Riddle’s face contorted. Then he forced it into an 
awful smile. 

“So. Your mother died to save you. Yes, that’s a 
powerful counter-charm. I can see now ... there is 
nothing special about you, after all. I wondered, you 
see. There are strange likenesses between us, after 
all. Even you must have noticed. Both half-bloods, 
orphans, raised by Muggles. Probably the only two 
Parselmouths to come to Hogwarts since the great 
Slytherin himself. We even look something alike ... 
but after all, it was merely a lucky chance that saved 
you from me. That’s all I wanted to know.” 

Harry stood, tense, waiting for Riddle to raise his 
wand. But Riddle’s twisted smile was widening again. 

“Now, Harry, I’m going to teach you a little lesson. 
Let’s match the powers of Lord Voldemort, Heir of 
Salazar Slytherin, against famous Harry Potter, and 
the best weapons Dumbledore can give him. ...” 

He cast an amused eye over Fawkes and the Sorting 
Hat, then walked away. Harry, fear spreading up his 
numb legs, watched Riddle stop between the high 
pillars and look up into the stone face of Slytherin, 
high above him in the half-darkness. Riddle opened 
his mouth wide and hissed — but Harry understood 
what he was saying. . . . 

“ Speak to me, Slytherin , greatest of the Hogwarts 
Four.” 

Harry wheeled around to look up at the statue, 
Fawkes swaying on his shoulder. 



Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Slytherin’s gigantic stone face was moving. 
Horrorstruck, Harry saw his mouth opening, wider 
and wider, to make a huge black hole. 

And something was stirring inside the statue’s mouth. 
Something was slithering up from its depths. 

Harry backed away until he hit the dark Chamber 
wall, and as he shut his eyes tight he felt Fawkes’ 
wing sweep his cheek as he took flight. Harry wanted 
to shout, “Don’t leave me!” but what chance did a 
phoenix have against the king of serpents? 

Something huge hit the stone floor of the Chamber. 
Harry felt it shudder — he knew what was happening, 
he could sense it, could almost see the giant serpent 
uncoiling itself from Slytherin’s mouth. Then he heard 
Riddle’s hissing voice: 

“Kill him.” 

The basilisk was moving toward Harry; he could hear 
its heavy body slithering heavily across the dusty 
floor. Eyes still tightly shut, Harry began to run 
blindly sideways, his hands outstretched, feeling his 
way — Voldemort was laughing — 

Harry tripped. He fell hard onto the stone and tasted 
blood — the serpent was barely feet from him, he 
could hear it coming — 

There was a loud, explosive spitting sound right above 
him, and then something heavy hit Harry so hard 
that he was smashed into the wall. Waiting for fangs 
to sink through his body he heard more mad hissing, 
something thrashing wildly off the pillars — 

He couldn’t help it — he opened his eyes wide enough 
to squint at what was going on. 

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




The enormous serpent, bright, poisonous green, thick 
as an oak trunk, had raised itself high in the air and 
its great blunt head was weaving drunkenly between 
the pillars. As Harry trembled, ready to close his eyes 
if it turned, he saw what had distracted the snake. 

Fawkes was soaring around its head, and the basilisk 
was snapping furiously at him with fangs long and 
thin as sabers — 

Fawkes dived. His long golden beak sank out of sight 
and a sudden shower of dark blood spattered the 
floor. The snake’s tail thrashed, narrowly missing 
Harry, and before Harry could shut his eyes, it turned 

— Harry looked straight into its face and saw that its 
eyes, both its great, bulbous yellow eyes, had been 
punctured by the phoenix; blood was streaming to the 
floor, and the snake was spitting in agony. 

“NO!” Harry heard Riddle screaming. “LEAVE THE 
BIRD! LEAVE THE BIRD! THE BOY IS BEHIND YOU! 
YOU CAN STILL SMELL HIM! KILL HIM!” 

The blinded serpent swayed, confused, still deadly. 
Fawkes was circling its head, piping his eerie song, 
jabbing here and there at its scaly nose as the blood 
poured from its ruined eyes. 

“Help me, help me,” Harry muttered wildly, “someone 

— anyone — ” 

The snake’s tail whipped across the floor again. Harry 
ducked. Something soft hit his face. 

The basilisk had swept the Sorting Hat into Harry’s 
arms. Harry seized it. It was all he had left, his only 
chance — he rammed it onto his head and threw 
himself flat onto the floor as the basilisk’s tail swung 
over him again. 

Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Help me — help me — Harry thought, his eyes 
screwed tight under the hat. Please help me — 

There was no answering voice. Instead, the hat 
contracted, as though an invisible hand was 
squeezing it very tightly. 

Something very hard and heavy thudded onto the top 
of Harry’s head, almost knocking him out. Stars 
winking in front of his eyes, he grabbed the top of the 
hat to pull it off and felt something long and hard 
beneath it. 

A gleaming silver sword had appeared inside the hat, 
its handle glittering with rubies the size of eggs. 

“KILL THE BOY! LEAVE THE BIRD! THE BOY IS 
BEHIND YOU! SNIFF — SMELL HIM!” 

Harry was on his feet, ready. The basilisk’s head was 
falling, its body coiling around, hitting pillars as it 
twisted to face him. He could see the vast, bloody eye 
sockets, see the mouth stretching wide, wide enough 
to swallow him whole, lined with fangs long as his 
sword, thin, glittering, venomous — 

It lunged blindly — Harry dodged and it hit the 
Chamber wall. It lunged again, and its forked tongue 
lashed Harry’s side. He raised the sword in both his 
hands — 

The basilisk lunged again, and this time its aim was 
true — Harry threw his whole weight behind the 
sword and drove it to the hilt into the roof of the 
serpent’s mouth — 

But as warm blood drenched Harry’s arms, he felt a 
searing pain just above his elbow. One long, 
poisonous fang was sinking deeper and deeper into 

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




his arm and it splintered as the basilisk keeled over 
sideways and fell, twitching, to the floor. 

Harry slid down the wall. He gripped the fang that 
was spreading poison through his body and wrenched 
it out of his arm. But he knew it was too late. White- 
hot pain was spreading slowly and steadily from the 
wound. Even as he dropped the fang and watched his 
own blood soaking his robes, his vision went foggy. 
The Chamber was dissolving in a whirl of dull color. 

A patch of scarlet swam past, and Harry heard a soft 
clatter of claws beside him. 

“Fawkes,” said Harry thickly. “You were fantastic, 
Fawkes. ...” He felt the bird lay its beautiful head on 
the spot where the serpent’s fang had pierced him. 

He could hear echoing footsteps and then a dark 
shadow moved in front of him. 

“You’re dead, Harry Potter,” said Riddle’s voice above 
him. “Dead. Even Dumbledore’s bird knows it. Do you 
see what he’s doing, Potter? He’s crying.” 

Harry blinked. Fawkes’s head slid in and out of focus. 
Thick, pearly tears were trickling down the glossy 
feathers. 

“I’m going to sit here and watch you die, Harry Potter. 
Take your time. I’m in no hurry.” 

Harry felt drowsy. Everything around him seemed to 
be spinning. 

“So ends the famous Harry Potter,” said Riddle’s 
distant voice. “Alone in the Chamber of Secrets, 
forsaken by his friends, defeated at last by the Dark 
Lord he so unwisely challenged. You’ll be back with 

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




your dear Mudblood mother soon, Harry. ... She 
bought you twelve years of borrowed time . . . but Lord 
Voldemort got you in the end, as you knew he must. 



If this is dying, thought Harry, it’s not so bad. 

Even the pain was leaving him. ... 

But was this dying? Instead of going black, the 
Chamber seemed to be coming back into focus. Harry 
gave his head a little shake and there was Fawkes, 
still resting his head on Harry’s arm. A pearly patch 
of tears was shining all around the wound — except 
that there was no wound — 

“Get away, bird,” said Riddle’s voice suddenly. “Get 
away from him — I said, get away — ” 

Harry raised his head. Riddle was pointing Harry’s 
wand at Fawkes; there was a bang like a gun, and 
Fawkes took flight again in a whirl of gold and scarlet. 

“Phoenix tears ...” said Riddle quietly, staring at 
Harry’s arm. “Of course ... healing powers ... I forgot 



He looked into Harry’s face. “But it makes no 
difference. In fact, I prefer it this way. Just you and 
me, Harry Potter ... you and me. ...” 

He raised the wand — 

Then, in a rush of wings, Fawkes had soared back 
overhead and something fell into Harry’s lap — the 
diary. 

For a split second, both Harry and Riddle, wand still 
raised, stared at it. Then, without thinking, without 

Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




considering, as though he had meant to do it all 
along, Harry seized the basilisk fang on the floor next 
to him and plunged it straight into the heart of the 
book. 

There was a long, dreadful, piercing scream. Ink 
spurted out of the diary in torrents, streaming over 
Harry’s hands, flooding the floor. Riddle was writhing 
and twisting, screaming and flailing and then — 

He had gone. Harry’s wand fell to the floor with a 
clatter and there was silence. Silence except for the 
steady drip drip of ink still oozing from the diary. The 
basilisk venom had burned a sizzling hole right 
through it. 

Shaking all over, Harry pulled himself up. His head 
was spinning as though he’d just traveled miles by 
Floo powder. Slowly, he gathered together his wand 
and the Sorting Hat, and, with a huge tug, retrieved 
the glittering sword from the roof of the basilisk’s 
mouth. 

Then came a faint moan from the end of the 
Chamber. Ginny was stirring. As Harry hurried 
toward her, she sat up. Her bemused eyes traveled 
from the huge form of the dead basilisk, over Harry, 
in his blood-soaked robes, then to the diary in his 
hand. She drew a great, shuddering gasp and tears 
began to pour down her face. 

“Harry — oh, Harry — I tried to tell you at b- 
breakfast, but I c -couldn’t say it in front of Percy — it 
was me, Harry — but I — I s-swear I d-didn’t mean to 
— R-Riddle made me, he t-took me over — and — 
how did you kill that — that thing? W-where’s Riddle? 
The last thing I r-remember is him coming out of the 
diary — ” 



Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s all right,” said Harry, holding up the diary, and 
showing Ginny the fang hole, “Riddle’s finished. Look! 
Him and the basilisk. C’mon, Ginny, let’s get out of 
here — ” 

“I’m going to be expelled!” Ginny wept as Harry helped 
her awkwardly to her feet. “I’ve looked forward to 
coming to Hogwarts ever since B-Bill came and n-now 
I’ll have to leave and — w-what’ll Mum and Dad say?” 

Fawkes was waiting for them, hovering in the 
Chamber entrance. Harry urged Ginny forward; they 
stepped over the motionless coils of the dead basilisk, 
through the echoing gloom, and back into the tunnel. 
Harry heard the stone doors close behind them with a 
soft hiss. 

After a few minutes’ progress up the dark tunnel, a 
distant sound of slowly shifting rock reached Harry’s 
ears. 

“Ron!” Harry yelled, speeding up. “Ginny’s okay! I’ve 
got her!” 

He heard Ron give a strangled cheer, and they turned 
the next bend to see his eager face staring through 
the sizable gap he had managed to make in the 
rockfall. 

“Ginny\” Ron thrust an arm through the gap in the 
rock to pull her through first. “You’re alive! I don’t 
believe it! What happened? How — what — where did 
that bird come from?” 

Fawkes had swooped through the gap after Ginny. 

“He’s Dumbledore’s,” said Harry, squeezing through 
himself. 



Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“How come you’ve got a sword?” said Ron, gaping at 
the glittering weapon in Harry’s hand. 



“I’ll explain when we get out of here,” said Harry with 
a sideways glance at Ginny, who was crying harder 
than ever. 

“But — ” 

“Later,” Harry said shortly. He didn’t think it was a 
good idea to tell Ron yet who’d been opening the 
Chamber, not in front of Ginny, anyway. “Where’s 
Lockhart?” 

“Back there,” said Ron, still looking puzzled but 
jerking his head up the tunnel toward the pipe. “He’s 
in a bad way. Come and see.” 

Led by Fawkes, whose wide scarlet wings emitted a 
soft golden glow in the darkness, they walked all the 
way back to the mouth of the pipe. Gilderoy Lockhart 
was sitting there, humming placidly to himself. 

“His memory’s gone,” said Ron. “The Memory Charm 
backfired. Hit him instead of us. Hasn’t got a clue 
who he is, or where he is, or who we are. I told him to 
come and wait here. He’s a danger to himself.” 

Lockhart peered good-naturedly up at them all. 

“Hello,” he said. “Odd sort of place, this, isn’t it? Do 
you live here?” 

“No,” said Ron, raising his eyebrows at Harry. 

Harry bent down and looked up the long, dark pipe. 

“Have you thought how we’re going to get back up 
this?” he said to Ron. 

Page | 361 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Ron shook his head, but Fawkes the phoenix had 
swooped past Harry and was now fluttering in front of 
him, his beady eyes bright in the dark. He was waving 
his long golden tail feathers. Harry looked uncertainly 
at him. 

“He looks like he wants you to grab hold ...” said Ron, 
looking perplexed. “But you’re much too heavy for a 
bird to pull up there — ” 

“Fawkes,” said Harry, “isn’t an ordinary bird.” He 
turned quickly to the others. “We’ve got to hold on to 
each other. Ginny, grab Ron’s hand. Professor 
Lockhart — ” 

“He means you,” said Ron sharply to Lockhart. 

“You hold Ginny’s other hand — ” 

Harry tucked the sword and the Sorting Hat into his 
belt, Ron took hold of the back of Harry’s robes, and 
Harry reached out and took hold of Fawkes’s 
strangely hot tail feathers. 

An extraordinary lightness seemed to spread through 
his whole body and the next second, in a rush of 
wings, they were flying upward through the pipe. 
Harry could hear Lockhart dangling below him, 
saying, “Amazing! Amazing! This is just like magic!” 
The chill air was whipping through Harry’s hair, and 
before he’d stopped enjoying the ride, it was over — 
all four of them were hitting the wet floor of Moaning 
Myrtle’s bathroom, and as Lockhart straightened his 
hat, the sink that hid the pipe was sliding back into 
place. 

Myrtle goggled at them. 

“You’re alive,” she said blankly to Harry. 

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“There’s no need to sound so disappointed,” he said 
grimly, wiping flecks of blood and slime off his 
glasses. 

“Oh, well ... I’d just been thinking ... if you had died, 
you’d have been welcome to share my toilet,” said 
Myrtle, blushing silver. 

“Urgh!” said Ron as they left the bathroom for the 
dark, deserted corridor outside. “Harry! I think 
Myrtle’s grown fond of you! You’ve got competition, 
Ginny!” 

But tears were still flooding silently down Ginny’s 
face. 

“Where now?” said Ron, with an anxious look at 
Ginny. Harry pointed. 

Fawkes was leading the way, glowing gold along the 
corridor. They strode after him, and moments later, 
found themselves outside Professor McGonagall’s 
office. 

Harry knocked and pushed the door open. 



Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 






DOBBY’S REWARD 

For a moment there was silence as Harry, Ron, 

Ginny, and Lockhart stood in the doorway, covered in 
muck and slime and (in Harry’s case) blood. Then 
there was a scream. 

“Ginny\” 

It was Mrs. Weasley, who had been sitting crying in 
front of the fire. She leapt to her feet, closely followed 
by Mr. Weasley, and both of them flung themselves on 
their daughter. 

Harry, however, was looking past them. Professor 
Dumbledore was standing by the mantelpiece, 
beaming, next to Professor McGonagall, who was 
taking great, steadying gasps, clutching her chest. 
Fawkes went whooshing past Harry’s ear and settled 
on Dumbledore ’s shoulder, just as Harry found 
himself and Ron being swept into Mrs. Weasley’s tight 
embrace. 

“You saved her! You saved her! How did you do it?” 

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



“I think we’d all like to know that,” said Professor 
McGonagall weakly. 

Mrs. Weasley let go of Harry, who hesitated for a 
moment, then walked over to the desk and laid upon 
it the Sorting Hat, the ruby-encrusted sword, and 
what remained of Riddle’s diary. 

Then he started telling them everything. For nearly a 
quarter of an hour he spoke into the rapt silence: He 
told them about hearing the disembodied voice, how 
Hermione had finally realized that he was hearing a 
basilisk in the pipes; how he and Ron had followed 
the spiders into the forest, that Aragog had told them 
where the last victim of the basilisk had died; how he 
had guessed that Moaning Myrtle had been the 
victim, and that the entrance to the Chamber of 
Secrets might be in her bathroom. ... 

“Very well,” Professor McGonagall prompted him as 
he paused, “so you found out where the entrance was 
— breaking a hundred school rules into pieces along 
the way, I might add — but how on earth did you all 
get out of there alive, Potter?” 

So Harry, his voice now growing hoarse from all this 
talking, told them about Fawkes’s timely arrival and 
about the Sorting Hat giving him the sword. But then 
he faltered. He had so far avoided mentioning Riddle’s 
diary — or Ginny. She was standing with her head 
against Mrs. Weasley ’s shoulder, and tears were still 
coursing silently down her cheeks. What if they 
expelled her? Harry thought in panic. Riddle’s diary 
didn’t work anymore. ... How could they prove it had 
been he who’d made her do it all? 

Instinctively, Harry looked at Dumbledore, who 
smiled faintly, the firelight glancing off his half-moon 
spectacles. 

Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“What interests me most,” said Dumbledore gently, “is 
how Lord Voldemort managed to enchant Ginny, 
when my sources tell me he is currently in hiding in 
the forests of Albania.” 

Relief — warm, sweeping, glorious relief — swept over 
Harry. 

“W-what’s that?” said Mr. Weasley in a stunned voice. 
“You-Know-Who? En-enchant Ginny? But Ginny ’s not 
... Ginny hasn’t been ... has she?” 

“It was this diary,” said Harry quickly, picking it up 
and showing it to Dumbledore. “Riddle wrote it when 
he was sixteen. ...” 

Dumbledore took the diary from Harry and peered 
keenly down his long, crooked nose at its burnt and 
soggy pages. 

“Brilliant,” he said softly. “Of course, he was probably 
the most brilliant student Hogwarts has ever seen.” 

He turned around to the Weasleys, who were looking 
utterly bewildered. 

“Very few people know that Lord Voldemort was once 
called Tom Riddle. I taught him myself, fifty years 
ago, at Hogwarts. He disappeared after leaving the 
school . . . traveled far and wide . . . sank so deeply into 
the Dark Arts, consorted with the very worst of our 
kind, underwent so many dangerous, magical 
transformations, that when he resurfaced as Lord 
Voldemort, he was barely recognizable. Hardly anyone 
connected Lord Voldemort with the clever, handsome 
boy who was once Head Boy here.” 

“But, Ginny,” said Mrs. Weasley. “What’s our Ginny 
got to do with — with — him?” 



Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“His d-diary!” Ginny sobbed. “I’ve b-been writing in it, 
and he’s been w- writing back all year — ” 

“Ginnyl” said Mr. Weasley, flabbergasted. “Haven’t I 
taught you anything ? What have I always told you? 
Never trust anything that can think for itself if you 
can’t see where it keeps its brain. Why didn’t you 
show the diary to me, or your mother? A suspicious 
object like that, it was clearly full of Dark Magic — ” 

“I d-didn’t know,” sobbed Ginny. “I found it inside one 
of the books Mum got me. I th-thought someone had 
just left it in there and forgotten about it — ” 

“Miss Weasley should go up to the hospital wing right 
away,” Dumbledore interrupted in a firm voice. “This 
has been a terrible ordeal for her. There will be no 
punishment. Older and wiser wizards than she have 
been hoodwinked by Lord Voldemort.” He strode over 
to the door and opened it. “Bed rest and perhaps a 
large, steaming mug of hot chocolate. I always find 
that cheers me up,” he added, twinkling kindly down 
at her. “You will find that Madam Pomfrey is still 
awake. She’s just giving out Mandrake juice — I 
daresay the basilisk’s victims will be waking up any 
moment.” 

“So Hermione’s okay!” said Ron brightly. 

“There has been no lasting harm done, Ginny,” said 
Dumbledore. 

Mrs. Weasley led Ginny out, and Mr. Weasley 
followed, still looking deeply shaken. 

“You know, Minerva,” Professor Dumbledore said 
thoughtfully to Professor McGonagall, “I think all this 
merits a good feast Might I ask you to go and alert 
the kitchens?” 

Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Right,” said Professor McGonagall crisply, also 
moving to the door. “Ill leave you to deal with Potter 
and Weasley, shall I?” 

“Certainly,” said Dumbledore. 

She left, and Harry and Ron gazed uncertainly at 
Dumbledore. What exactly had Professor McGonagall 
meant, deal with them? Surely — surely — they 
weren’t about to be punished? 

“I seem to remember telling you both that I would 
have to expel you if you broke any more school rules,” 
said Dumbledore. 

Ron opened his mouth in horror. 

“Which goes to show that the best of us must 
sometimes eat our words,” Dumbledore went on, 
smiling. “You will both receive Special Awards for 
Services to the School and — let me see — yes, I think 
two hundred points apiece for Gryffindor.” 

Ron went as brightly pink as Lockhart’s valentine 
flowers and closed his mouth again. 

“But one of us seems to be keeping mightily quiet 
about his part in this dangerous adventure,” 
Dumbledore added. “Why so modest, Gilderoy?” 

Harry gave a start. He had completely forgotten about 
Lockhart. He turned and saw that Lockhart was 
standing in a corner of the room, still wearing his 
vague smile. When Dumbledore addressed him, 
Lockhart looked over his shoulder to see who he was 
talking to. 



Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor Dumbledore,” Ron said quickly, “there was 
an accident down in the Chamber of Secrets. 
Professor Lockhart — ” 

“Am I a professor?” said Lockhart in mild surprise. 
“Goodness. I expect I was hopeless, was I?” 

“He tried to do a Memory Charm and the wand 
backfired,” Ron explained quietly to Dumbledore. 

“Dear me,” said Dumbledore, shaking his head, his 
long silver mustache quivering. “Impaled upon your 
own sword, Gilderoy!” 

“Sword?” said Lockhart dimly. “Haven’t got a sword. 
That boy has, though.” He pointed at Harry. “He’ll 
lend you one.” 

“Would you mind taking Professor Lockhart up to the 
infirmary, too?” Dumbledore said to Ron. “I’d like a 
few more words with Harry. ...” 

Lockhart ambled out. Ron cast a curious look back at 
Dumbledore and Harry as he closed the door. 

Dumbledore crossed to one of the chairs by the fire. 

“Sit down, Harry,” he said, and Harry sat, feeling 
unaccountably nervous. 

“First of all, Harry, I want to thank you,” said 
Dumbledore, eyes twinkling again. “You must have 
shown me real loyalty down in the Chamber. Nothing 
but that could have called Fawkes to you.” 

He stroked the phoenix, which had fluttered down 
onto his knee. Harry grinned awkwardly as 
Dumbledore watched him. 



Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“And so you met Tom Riddle,” said Dumbledore 
thoughtfully. “I imagine he was most interested in 
you. ...” 

Suddenly, something that was nagging at Harry came 
tumbling out of his mouth. 

“Professor Dumbledore ... Riddle said I’m like him. 
Strange likenesses, he said. ...” 

“ Did he, now?” said Dumbledore, looking thoughtfully 
at Harry from under his thick silver eyebrows. “And 
what do you think, Harry?” 

“I don’t think I’m like him!” said Harry, more loudly 
than he’d intended. “I mean, I’m — I’m in Gryffindor, 
I’m ...” 

But he fell silent, a lurking doubt resurfacing in his 
mind. 

“Professor,” he started again after a moment. “The 
Sorting Hat told me I’d — I’d have done well in 
Slytherin. Everyone thought / was Slytherin’s heir for 
a while ... because I can speak Parseltongue. ...” 

“You can speak Parseltongue, Harry,” said 
Dumbledore calmly, “because Lord Voldemort — who 
is the last remaining descendant of Salazar Slytherin 
— can speak Parseltongue. Unless I’m much 
mistaken, he transferred some of his own powers to 
you the night he gave you that scar. Not something he 
intended to do, I’m sure. ...” 

“Voldemort put a bit of himself in me?” Harry said, 
thunderstruck. 

“It certainly seems so.” 



Page | 370 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“So I should be in Slytherin,” Harry said, looking 
desperately into Dumbledore ’s face. “The Sorting Hat 
could see Slytherin ’s power in me, and it — ” 

“Put you in Gryffindor,” said Dumbledore calmly. 
“Listen to me, Harry. You happen to have many 
qualities Salazar Slytherin prized in his hand-picked 
students. His own very rare gift, Parseltongue — 
resourcefulness — determination — a certain 
disregard for rules,” he added, his mustache 
quivering again. “Yet the Sorting Hat placed you in 
Gryffindor. You know why that was. Think.” 

“It only put me in Gryffindor,” said Harry in a 
defeated voice, “because I asked not to go in 
Slytherin. ...” 

“Exactly,” said Dumbledore, beaming once more. 
“Which makes you very different from Tom Riddle. It 
is our choices, Harry, that show what we truly are, far 
more than our abilities.” Harry sat motionless in his 
chair, stunned. “If you want proof, Harry, that you 
belong in Gryffindor, I suggest you look more closely 
at this.” 

Dumbledore reached across to Professor McGonagall’s 
desk, picked up the blood-stained silver sword, and 
handed it to Harry. Dully, Harry turned it over, the 
rubies blazing in the firelight. And then he saw the 
name engraved just below the hilt. 

Godric Gryffindor. 

“Only a true Gryffindor could have pulled that out of 
the hat, Harry,” said Dumbledore simply. 

For a minute, neither of them spoke. Then 
Dumbledore pulled open one of the drawers in 



Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Professor McGonagall’s desk and took out a quill and 
a bottle of ink. 

“What you need, Harry, is some food and sleep. I 
suggest you go down to the feast, while I write to 
Azkaban — we need our gamekeeper back. And I 
must draft an advertisement for the Daily Prophet, 
too,” he added thoughtfully. “Well be needing a new 
Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher. ... Dear me, 
we do seem to run through them, don’t we?” 

Harry got up and crossed to the door. He had just 
reached for the handle, however, when the door burst 
open so violently that it bounced back off the wall. 

Lucius Malfoy stood there, fury in his face. And 
cowering behind his legs, heavily wrapped in 
bandages, was Dobby. 

“Good evening, Lucius,” said Dumbledore pleasantly. 

Mr. Malfoy almost knocked Harry over as he swept 
into the room. Dobby went scurrying in after him, 
crouching at the hem of his cloak, a look of abject 
terror on his face. 

The elf was carrying a stained rag with which he was 
attempting to finish cleaning Mr. Malfoy ’s shoes. 
Apparently Mr. Malfoy had set out in a great hurry, 
for not only were his shoes half-polished, but his 
usually sleek hair was disheveled. Ignoring the elf 
bobbing apologetically around his ankles, he fixed his 
cold eyes upon Dumbledore. 

“So!” he said “You’ve come back. The governors 
suspended you, but you still saw fit to return to 
Hogwarts.” 



Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, you see, Lucius,” said Dumbledore, smiling 
serenely, “the other eleven governors contacted me 
today. It was something like being caught in a 
hailstorm of owls, to tell the truth. They’d heard that 
Arthur Weasley’s daughter had been killed and 
wanted me back here at once. They seemed to think I 
was the best man for the job after all. Very strange 
tales they told me, too. ... Several of them seemed to 
think that you had threatened to curse their families 
if they didn’t agree to suspend me in the first place.” 

Mr. Malfoy went even paler than usual, but his eyes 
were still slits of fury. 

“So — have you stopped the attacks yet?” he sneered. 
“Have you caught the culprit?” 

“We have,” said Dumbledore, with a smile. 

“Well?” said Mr. Malfoy sharply. “Who is it?” 

“The same person as last time, Lucius,” said 
Dumbledore. “But this time, Lord Voldemort was 
acting through somebody else. By means of this 
diary.” 

He held up the small black book with the large hole 
through the center, watching Mr. Malfoy closely. 
Harry, however, was watching Dobby. 

The elf was doing something very odd. His great eyes 
fixed meaningfully on Harry, he kept pointing at the 
diary, then at Mr. Malfoy, and then hitting himself 
hard on the head with his fist. 

“I see ...” said Mr. Malfoy slowly to Dumbledore. 

“A clever plan,” said Dumbledore in a level voice, still 
staring Mr. Malfoy straight in the eye. “Because if 

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Harry here” — Mr. Malfoy shot Harry a swift, sharp 
look — “and his friend Ron hadn’t discovered this 
book, why — Ginny Weasley might have taken all the 
blame. No one would ever have been able to prove she 
hadn’t acted of her own free will. ...” 

Mr. Malfoy said nothing. His face was suddenly 
masklike. 

“And imagine,” Dumbledore went on, “what might 
have happened then. ... The Weasleys are one of our 
most prominent pure-blood families. Imagine the 
effect on Arthur Weasley and his Muggle Protection 
Act, if his own daughter was discovered attacking and 
killing Muggle-borns. ... Very fortunate the diary was 
discovered, and Riddle’s memories wiped from it. Who 
knows what the consequences might have been 
otherwise. ...” 

Mr. Malfoy forced himself to speak. 

“Very fortunate,” he said stiffly. 

And still, behind his back, Dobby was pointing, first 
to the diary, then to Lucius Malfoy, then punching 
himself in the head. 

And Harry suddenly understood. He nodded at 
Dobby, and Dobby backed into a corner, now twisting 
his ears in punishment. 

“Don’t you want to know how Ginny got hold of that 
diary, Mr. Malfoy?” said Harry. 

Lucius Malfoy rounded on him. 

“How should I know how the stupid little girl got hold 
of it?” he said. 



Page | 374 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“Because you gave it to her,” said Harry. “In Flourish 
and Blotts. You picked up her old Transfiguration 
book and slipped the diary inside it, didn’t you?” 

He saw Mr. Malfoy’s white hands clench and 
unclench. 

“Prove it,” he hissed. 

“Oh, no one will be able to do that,” said Dumbledore, 
smiling at Harry. “Not now that Riddle has vanished 
from the book. On the other hand, I would advise you, 
Lucius, not to go giving out any more of Lord 
Voldemort’s old school things. If any more of them 
find their way into innocent hands, I think Arthur 
Weasley, for one, will make sure they are traced back 
to you. ...” 

Lucius Malfoy stood for a moment, and Harry 
distinctly saw his right hand twitch as though he was 
longing to reach for his wand. Instead, he turned to 
his house-elf. 

“We’re going, Dobby!” 

He wrenched open the door and as the elf came 
hurrying up to him, he kicked him right through it. 
They could hear Dobby squealing with pain all the 
way along the corridor. Harry stood for a moment, 
thinking hard. Then it came to him — 

“Professor Dumbledore,” he said hurriedly. “Can I give 
that diary back to Mr. Malfoy, please?” 

“Certainly, Harry,” said Dumbledore calmly. “But 
hurry. The feast, remember. ...” 

Harry grabbed the diary and dashed out of the office. 
He could hear Dobby’s squeals of pain receding 

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




around the corner. Quickly, wondering if this plan 
could possibly work, Harry took off one of his shoes, 
pulled off his slimy, filthy sock, and stuffed the diary 
into it. Then he ran down the dark corridor. 

He caught up with them at the top of the stairs. 

“Mr. Malfoy,” he gasped, skidding to a halt, “I’ve got 
something for you — ” 

And he forced the smelly sock into Lucius Malfoy’s 
hand. 

“What the — ?” 

Mr. Malfoy ripped the sock off the diary, threw it 
aside, then looked furiously from the ruined book to 
Harry. 

“You’ll meet the same sticky end as your parents one 
of these days, Harry Potter,” he said softly. “They were 
meddlesome fools, too.” 

He turned to go. 

“Come, Dobby. I said, come.” 

But Dobby didn’t move. He was holding up Harry’s 
disgusting, slimy sock, and looking at it as though it 
were a priceless treasure. 

“Master has given a sock,” said the elf in wonderment. 
“Master gave it to Dobby.” 

“What’s that?” spat Mr. Malfoy. “What did you say?” 

“Got a sock,” said Dobby in disbelief. “Master threw it, 
and Dobby caught it, and Dobby — Dobby is free.” 



Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




Lucius Malfoy stood frozen, staring at the elf. Then he 
lunged at Harry. 

“You’ve lost me my servant, boy!” 

But Dobby shouted, “You shall not harm Harry 
Potter!” 

There was a loud bang, and Mr. Malfoy was thrown 
backward. He crashed down the stairs, three at a 
time, landing in a crumpled heap on the landing 
below. He got up, his face livid, and pulled out his 
wand, but Dobby raised a long, threatening finger. 

“You shall go now,” he said fiercely, pointing down at 
Mr. Malfoy. “You shall not touch Harry Potter. You 
shall go now.” 

Lucius Malfoy had no choice. With a last, incensed 
stare at the pair of them, he swung his cloak around 
him and hurried out of sight. 

“Harry Potter freed Dobby!” said the elf shrilly, gazing 
up at Harry, moonlight from the nearest window 
reflected in his orb-like eyes. “Harry Potter set Dobby 
free!” 

“Least I could do, Dobby,” said Harry, grinning. “Just 
promise never to try and save my life again.” 

The elf’s ugly brown face split suddenly into a wide, 
toothy smile. 

“I’ve just got one question, Dobby,” said Harry as 
Dobby pulled on Harry’s sock with shaking hands. 
“You told me all this had nothing to do with He-Who- 
Must-Not-Be-Named, remember? Well — ” 



Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




“It was a clue, sir,” said Dobby, his eyes widening, as 
though this was obvious. “Was giving you a clue. The 
Dark Lord, before he changed his name, could be 
freely named, you see?” 

“Right,” said Harry weakly. “Well, I’d better go. There’s 
a feast, and my friend Hermione should be awake by 
now. ...” 

Dobby threw his arms around Harry’s middle and 
hugged him. 

“Harry Potter is greater by far than Dobby knew!” he 
sobbed. “Farewell, Harry Potter!” 

And with a final loud crack, Dobby disappeared. 

Harry had been to several Hogwarts feasts, but never 
one quite like this. Everybody was in their pajamas, 
and the celebration lasted all night. Harry didn’t know 
whether the best bit was Hermione running toward 
him, screaming “You solved it! You solved it!” or 
Justin hurrying over from the Hufflepuff table to 
wring his hand and apologize endlessly for suspecting 
him, or Hagrid turning up at half past three, cuffing 
Harry and Ron so hard on the shoulders that they 
were knocked into their plates of trifle, or his and 
Ron’s four hundred points for Gryffindor securing the 
House Cup for the second year running, or Professor 
McGonagall standing up to tell them all that the 
exams had been canceled as a school treat (“Oh, no!” 
said Hermione), or Dumbledore announcing that, 
unfortunately, Professor Lockhart would be unable to 
return next year, owing to the fact that he needed to 
go away and get his memory back. Quite a few of the 
teachers joined in the cheering that greeted this news. 

“Shame,” said Ron, helping himself to a jam 
doughnut. “He was starting to grow on me.” 

Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




The rest of the final term passed in a haze of blazing 
sunshine. Hogwarts was back to normal with only a 
few, small differences — Defense Against the Dark 
Arts classes were canceled (“but we’ve had plenty of 
practice at that anyway,” Ron told a disgruntled 
Hermione) and Lucius Malfoy had been sacked as a 
school governor. Draco was no longer strutting 
around the school as though he owned the place. On 
the contrary, he looked resentful and sulky. On the 
other hand, Ginny Weasley was perfectly happy 
again. 

Too soon, it was time for the journey home on the 
Hogwarts Express. Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, 
George, and Ginny got a compartment to themselves. 
They made the most of the last few hours in which 
they were allowed to do magic before the holidays. 
They played Exploding Snap, set off the very last of 
Fred and George’s Filibuster fireworks, and practiced 
disarming each other by magic. Harry was getting 
very good at it. 

They were almost at King’s Cross when Harry 
remembered something. 

“Ginny — what did you see Percy doing, that he didn’t 
want you to tell anyone?” 

“Oh, that,” said Ginny, giggling. “Well — Percy’s got a 
girlfriend.” 

Fred dropped a stack of books on George’s head. 
“What?” 

“It’s that Ravenclaw prefect, Penelope Clearwater,” 
said Ginny. “That’s who he was writing to all last 
summer. He’s been meeting her all over the school in 
secret. I walked in on them kissing in an empty 

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 




classroom one day. He was so upset when she was — 
you know — attacked. You won’t tease him, will you?” 
she added anxiously. 

“Wouldn’t dream of it,” said Fred, who was looking 
like his birthday had come early. 

“Definitely not,” said George, sniggering. 

The Hogwarts Express slowed and finally stopped. 

Harry pulled out his quill and a bit of parchment and 
turned to Ron and Hermione. 

“This is called a telephone number,” he told Ron, 
scribbling it twice, tearing the parchment in two, and 
handing it to them. “I told your dad how to use a 
telephone last summer — he’ll know. Call me at the 
Dursleys’, okay? I can’t stand another two months 
with only Dudley to talk to. ...” 

“Your aunt and uncle will be proud, though, won’t 
they?” said Hermione as they got off the train and 
joined the crowd thronging toward the enchanted 
barrier. “When they hear what you did this year? 

“Proud?” said Harry. “Are you crazy? All those times I 
could’ve died, and I didn’t manage it? They’ll be 
furious. ...” 

And together they walked back through the gateway 
to the Muggle world. 



Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling 



/ 




OWL POST 

Harry Potter was a highly unusual boy in many ways. 
For one thing, he hated the summer holidays more 
than any other time of year. For another, he really 
wanted to do his homework but was forced to do it in 
secret, in the dead of night. And he also happened to 
be a wizard. 

It was nearly midnight, and he was lying on his 
stomach in bed, the blankets drawn right over his 
head like a tent, a flashlight in one hand and a large 
leather-bound book (A History of Magic by Bathilda 
Bagshot) propped open against the pillow. Harry 
moved the tip of his eagle-feather quill down the page, 
frowning as he looked for something that would help 
him write his essay, “Witch Burning in the Fourteenth 
Century Was Completely Pointless — discuss.” 

The quill paused at the top of a likely-looking 
paragraph. Harry pushed his round glasses up the 
bridge of his nose, moved his flashlight closer to the 
book, and read: 



Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Non-magic people (more commonly known as 
Muggles) were particularly afraid of magic in medieval 
times, but not very good at recognizing it. On the rare 
occasion that they did catch a real witch or wizard, 
burning had no effect whatsoever. The witch or wizard 
would perform a basic Flame Freezing Charm and 
then pretend to shriek with pain while enjoying a 
gentle, tickling sensation. Indeed, Wendelin the Weird 
enjoyed being burned so much that she allowed 
herself to be caught no less than forty-seven times in 
various disguises. 

Harry put his quill between his teeth and reached 
underneath his pillow for his ink bottle and a roll of 
parchment. Slowly and very carefully he unscrewed 
the ink bottle, dipped his quill into it, and began to 
write, pausing every now and then to listen, because 
if any of the Dursleys heard the scratching of his quill 
on their way to the bathroom, he’d probably find 
himself locked in the cupboard under the stairs for 
the rest of the summer. 

The Dursley family of number four, Privet Drive, was 
the reason that Harry never enjoyed his summer 
holidays. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and their son, 
Dudley, were Harry’s only living relatives. They were 
Muggles, and they had a very medieval attitude 
toward magic. Harry’s dead parents, who had been a 
witch and wizard themselves, were never mentioned 
under the Dursleys’ roof. For years, Aunt Petunia and 
Uncle Vernon had hoped that if they kept Harry as 
downtrodden as possible, they would be able to 
squash the magic out of him. To their fury, they had 
been unsuccessful. These days they lived in terror of 
anyone finding out that Harry had spent most of the 
last two years at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and 
Wizardry. The most they could do, however, was to 
lock away Harry’s spellbooks, wand, cauldron, and 



Page | 3 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




broomstick at the start of the summer break, and 
forbid him to talk to the neighbors. 

This separation from his spellbooks had been a real 
problem for Harry, because his teachers at Hogwarts 
had given him a lot of holiday work. One of the 
essays, a particularly nasty one about shrinking 
potions, was for Harry’s least favorite teacher, 
Professor Snape, who would be delighted to have an 
excuse to give Harry detention for a month. Harry had 
therefore seized his chance in the first week of the 
holidays. While Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and 
Dudley had gone out into the front garden to admire 
Uncle Vernon’s new company car (in very loud voices, 
so that the rest of the street would notice it too), 

Harry had crept downstairs, picked the lock on the 
cupboard under the stairs, grabbed some of his 
books, and hidden them in his bedroom. As long as 
he didn’t leave spots of ink on the sheets, the 
Dursleys need never know that he was studying 
magic by night. 

Harry was particularly keen to avoid trouble with his 
aunt and uncle at the moment, as they were already 
in an especially bad mood with him, all because he’d 
received a telephone call from a fellow wizard one 
week into the school vacation. 

Ron Weasley, who was one of Harry’s best friends at 
Hogwarts, came from a whole family of wizards. This 
meant that he knew a lot of things Harry didn’t, but 
had never used a telephone before. Most unluckily it 
had been Uncle Vernon who had answered the call. 

“Vernon Dursley speaking.” 

Harry, who happened to be in the room at the time, 
froze as he heard Ron’s voice answer. 



Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“HELLO? HELLO? CAN YOU HEAR ME? I — WANT — 
TO — TALK — TO — HARRY — POTTER!” 

Ron was yelling so loudly that Uncle Vernon jumped 
and held the receiver a foot away from his ear, staring 
at it with an expression of mingled fury and alarm. 

“WHO IS THIS?” he roared in the direction of the 
mouthpiece. “WHO ARE YOU?” 

“RON — WEASLEY!” Ron bellowed back, as though he 
and Uncle Vernon were speaking from opposite ends 
of a football field. “I’M — A — FRIEND — OF — 
HARRY’S — FROM — SCHOOL — ” 

Uncle Vernon’s small eyes swiveled around to Harry, 
who was rooted to the spot. 

“THERE IS NO HARRY POTTER HERE!” he roared, 
now holding the receiver at arm’s length, as though 
frightened it might explode. “I DONT KNOW WHAT 
SCHOOL YOU’RE TALKING ABOUT! NEVER 
CONTACT ME AGAIN! DONT YOU COME NEAR MY 
FAMILY!” 

And he threw the receiver back onto the telephone as 
if dropping a poisonous spider. 

The fight that had followed had been one of the worst 
ever. 

“HOW DARE YOU GIVE THIS NUMBER TO PEOPLE 
LIKE — PEOPLE LIKE YOU!” Uncle Vernon had 
roared, spraying Harry with spit. 

Ron obviously realized that he’d gotten Harry into 
trouble, because he hadn’t called again. Harry’s other 
best friend from Hogwarts, Hermione Granger, hadn’t 
been in touch either. Harry suspected that Ron had 

Page | 5 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




warned Hermione not to call, which was a pity, 
because Hermione, the cleverest witch in Harry’s 
year, had Muggle parents, knew perfectly well how to 
use a telephone, and would probably have had 
enough sense not to say that she went to Hogwarts. 

So Harry had had no word from any of his wizarding 
friends for five long weeks, and this summer was 
turning out to be almost as bad as the last one. There 
was just one very small improvement — after 
swearing that he wouldn’t use her to send letters to 
any of his friends, Harry had been allowed to let his 
owl, Hedwig, out at night. Uncle Vernon had given in 
because of the racket Hedwig made if she was locked 
in her cage all the time. 

Harry finished writing about Wendelin the Weird and 
paused to listen again. The silence in the dark house 
was broken only by the distant, grunting snores of his 
enormous cousin, Dudley. It must be very late, Harry 
thought. His eyes were itching with tiredness. 

Perhaps he’d finish this essay tomorrow night. ... 

He replaced the top of the ink bottle; pulled an old 
pillowcase from under his bed; put the flashlight, A 
History of Magic, his essay, quill, and ink inside it; got 
out of bed; and hid the lot under a loose floorboard 
under his bed. Then he stood up, stretched, and 
checked the time on the luminous alarm clock on his 
bedside table. 

It was one o’clock in the morning. Harry’s stomach 
gave a funny jolt. He had been thirteen years old, 
without realizing it, for a whole hour. 

Yet another unusual thing about Harry was how little 
he looked forward to his birthdays. He had never 
received a birthday card in his life. The Dursleys had 



Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




completely ignored his last two birthdays, and he had 
no reason to suppose they would remember this one. 

Harry walked across the dark room, past Hedwig’s 
large, empty cage, to the open window. He leaned on 
the sill, the cool night air pleasant on his face after a 
long time under the blankets. Hedwig had been 
absent for two nights now. Harry wasn’t worried 
about her: she’d been gone this long before. But he 
hoped she’d be back soon — she was the only living 
creature in this house who didn’t flinch at the sight of 
him. 

Harry, though still rather small and skinny for his 
age, had grown a few inches over the last year. His 
jet-black hair, however, was just as it always had 
been — stubbornly untidy, whatever he did to it. The 
eyes behind his glasses were bright green, and on his 
forehead, clearly visible through his hair, was a thin 
scar, shaped like a bolt of lightning. 

Of all the unusual things about Harry, this scar was 
the most extraordinary of all. It was not, as the 
Dursleys had pretended for ten years, a souvenir of 
the car crash that had killed Harry’s parents, because 
Lily and James Potter had not died in a car crash. 
They had been murdered, murdered by the most 
feared Dark wizard for a hundred years, Lord 
Voldemort. Harry had escaped from the same attack 
with nothing more than a scar on his forehead, where 
Voldemort’s curse, instead of killing him, had 
rebounded upon its originator. Barely alive, 

Voldemort had fled. ... 

But Harry had come face-to-face with him at 
Hogwarts. Remembering their last meeting as he 
stood at the dark window, Harry had to admit he was 
lucky even to have reached his thirteenth birthday. 



Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He scanned the starry sky for a sign of Hedwig, 
perhaps soaring back to him with a dead mouse 
dangling from her beak, expecting praise. Gazing 
absently over the rooftops, it was a few seconds before 
Harry realized what he was seeing. 

Silhouetted against the golden moon, and growing 
larger every moment, was a large, strangely lopsided 
creature, and it was flapping in Harry’s direction. He 
stood quite still, watching it sink lower and lower. For 
a split second he hesitated, his hand on the window 
latch, wondering whether to slam it shut. But then 
the bizarre creature soared over one of the street 
lamps of Privet Drive, and Harry, realizing what it 
was, leapt aside. 

Through the window soared three owls, two of them 
holding up the third, which appeared to be 
unconscious. They landed with a soft flump on 
Harry’s bed, and the middle owl, which was large and 
gray, keeled right over and lay motionless. There was 
a large package tied to its legs. 

Harry recognized the unconscious owl at once — his 
name was Errol, and he belonged to the Weasley 
family. Harry dashed to the bed, untied the cords 
around Errol’s legs, took off the parcel, and then 
carried Errol to Hedwig’s cage. Errol opened one 
bleary eye, gave a feeble hoot of thanks, and began to 
gulp some water. 

Harry turned back to the remaining owls. One of 
them, the large snowy female, was his own Hedwig. 
She, too, was carrying a parcel and looked extremely 
pleased with herself. She gave Harry an affectionate 
nip with her beak as he removed her burden, then 
flew across the room to join Errol. 



Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry didn’t recognize the third owl, a handsome 
tawny one, but he knew at once where it had come 
from, because in addition to a third package, it was 
carrying a letter bearing the Hogwarts crest. When 
Harry relieved this owl of its burden, it ruffled its 
feathers importantly, stretched its wings, and took off 
through the window into the night. 

Harry sat down on his bed and grabbed Errol’s 
package, ripped off the brown paper, and discovered a 
present wrapped in gold, and his first ever birthday 
card. Fingers trembling slightly, he opened the 
envelope. Two pieces of paper fell out — a letter and a 
newspaper clipping. 

The clipping had clearly come out of the wizarding 
newspaper, the Daily Prophet, because the people in 
the black-and-white picture were moving. Harry 
picked up the clipping, smoothed it out, and read: 

MINISTRY OF MAGIC EMPLOYEE 

SCOOPS GRAND PRIZE 

Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts 
Office at the Ministry of Magic, has won the annual 
Daily Prophet Grand Prize Galleon Draw. 

A delighted Mr. Weasley told the Daily Prophet, “We 
will be spending the gold on a summer holiday in 
Egypt, where our eldest son, Bill, works as a curse 
breaker for Gringotts Wizarding Bank. ” 

The Weasley family will be spending a month in 
Egypt, returning for the start of the new school year 
at Hogwarts, which five of the Weasley children 
currently attend. 



Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry scanned the moving photograph, and a grin 
spread across his face as he saw all nine of the 
Weasleys waving furiously at him, standing in front of 
a large pyramid. Plump little Mrs. Weasley; tall, 
balding Mr. Weasley; six sons; and one daughter, all 
(though the black-and-white picture didn’t show it) 
with flaming-red hair. Right in the middle of the 
picture was Ron, tall and gangling, with his pet rat, 
Scabbers, on his shoulder and his arm around his 
little sister, Ginny. 

Harry couldn’t think of anyone who deserved to win a 
large pile of gold more than the Weasleys, who were 
very nice and extremely poor. He picked up Ron’s 
letter and unfolded it. 

Dear Harry, 

Happy birthday! 

Look, I’m really sorry about that telephone call. I hope 
the Muggles didn’t give you a hard time. I asked Dad, 
and he reckons I shouldn’t have shouted. 

It’s amazing here in Egypt. Bill’s taken us around all 
the tombs and you wouldn’t believe the curses those 
old Egyptian wizards put on them. Mum wouldn’t let 
Ginny come in the last one. There were all these 
mutant skeletons in there, of Muggles who’d broken in 
and grown extra heads and stuff. 

I couldn’t believe it when Dad won the Daily Prophet 
Draw. Seven hundred galleons! Most of it’s gone on 
this trip, but they’re going to buy me a new wand for 
next year. 

Harry remembered only too well the occasion when 
Ron’s old wand had snapped. It had happened when 



Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the car the two of them had been flying to Hogwarts 
had crashed into a tree on the school grounds. 

We’ll be back about a week before term starts and 
we’ll be going up to London to get my wand and our 
new books. Any chance of meeting you there? 

Don’t let the Muggles get you down! 

Try and come to London, 

Ron 

PS. Percy’s Head Boy. He got the letter last week. 

Harry glanced back at the photograph. Percy, who 
was in his seventh and final year at Hogwarts, was 
looking particularly smug. He had pinned his Head 
Boy badge to the fez perched jauntily on top of his 
neat hair, his horn-rimmed glasses flashing in the 
Egyptian sun. 

Harry now turned to his present and unwrapped it. 
Inside was what looked like a miniature glass 
spinning top. There was another note from Ron 
beneath it. 

Harry — this is a Pocket Sneakoscope. If there’s 
someone untrustworthy around, it’s supposed to light 
up and spin. Bill says it’s rubbish sold for wizard 
tourists and isn’t reliable, because it kept lighting up at 
dinner last night. But he didn’t realize Fred and George 
had put beetles in his soup. 

Bye — 

Ron 



Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry put the Pocket Sneakoscope on his bedside 
table, where it stood quite still, balanced on its point, 
reflecting the luminous hands of his clock. He looked 
at it happily for a few seconds, then picked up the 
parcel Hedwig had brought. 

Inside this, too, there was a wrapped present, a card, 
and a letter, this time from Hermione. 

Dear Harry, 

Ron wrote to me and told me about his phone call to 
your Uncle Vernon. I do hope you’re all right. 

I’m on holiday in France at the moment and I didn’t 
know how I was going to send this to you — what if 
they’d opened it at customs? — but then Hedwig 
turned up! I think she wanted to make sure you got 
something for your birthday for a change. I bought your 
present by owl-order; there was an advertisement in 
the Daily Prophet (I’ve been getting it delivered; it’s so 
good to keep up with what’s going on in the wizarding 
world). Did you see that picture of Ron and his family a 
week ago? I bet he’s learning loads. I’m really jealous 
— the ancient Egyptian wizards were fascinating. 

There’s some interesting local history of witchcraft 
here, too. I’ve rewritten my whole History of Magic 
essay to include some of the things I’ve found out. I 
hope it’s not too long — it’s two rolls of parchment more 
than Professor Binns asked for. 

Ron says he’s going to be in London in the last week of 
the holidays. Can you make it? Will your aunt and 
uncle let you come? I really hope you can. If not, I’ll see 
you on the Hogwarts Express on September first! 

Love from 



Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione 



PS. Ron says Percy’s Head Boy. I’ll bet Percy’s really 
pleased. 

Ron doesn’t seem too happy about it. 

Harry laughed as he put Hermione ’s letter aside and 
picked up her present. It was very heavy. Knowing 
Hermione, he was sure it would be a large book full of 
very difficult spells — but it wasn’t. His heart gave a 
huge bound as he ripped back the paper and saw a 
sleek black leather case, with silver words stamped 
across it, reading Broomstick Servicing Kit. 

“Wow, Hermione!” Harry whispered, unzipping the 
case to look inside. 

There was a large jar of Fleetwood’s High-Finish 
Handle Polish, a pair of gleaming silver Tail-Twig 
Clippers, a tiny brass compass to clip on your broom 
for long journeys, and a Handbook of Do-It-Yourself 
Broomcare. 

Apart from his friends, the thing that Harry missed 
most about Hogwarts was Quidditch, the most 
popular sport in the magical world — highly 
dangerous, very exciting, and played on broomsticks. 
Harry happened to be a very good Quidditch player; 
he had been the youngest person in a century to be 
picked for one of the Hogwarts House teams. One of 
Harry’s most prized possessions was his Nimbus Two 
Thousand racing broom. 

Harry put the leather case aside and picked up his 
last parcel. He recognized the untidy scrawl on the 
brown paper at once: this was from Hagrid, the 
Hogwarts gamekeeper. He tore off the top layer of 
paper and glimpsed something green and leathery, 
Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




but before he could unwrap it properly, the parcel 
gave a strange quiver, and whatever was inside it 
snapped loudly — as though it had jaws. 

Harry froze. He knew that Hagrid would never send 
him anything dangerous on purpose, but then, 

Hagrid didn’t have a normal person’s view of what 
was dangerous. Hagrid had been known to befriend 
giant spiders, buy vicious, three-headed dogs from 
men in pubs, and sneak illegal dragon eggs into his 
cabin. 

Harry poked the parcel nervously. It snapped loudly 
again. Harry reached for the lamp on his bedside 
table, gripped it firmly in one hand, and raised it over 
his head, ready to strike. Then he seized the rest of 
the wrapping paper in his other hand and pulled. 

And out fell — a book. Harry just had time to register 
its handsome green cover, emblazoned with the 
golden title The Monster Book of Monsters, before it 
flipped onto its edge and scuttled sideways along the 
bed like some weird crab. 

“Uh-oh,” Harry muttered. 

The book toppled off the bed with a loud clunk and 
shuffled rapidly across the room. Harry followed it 
stealthily. The book was hiding in the dark space 
under his desk. Praying that the Dursleys were still 
fast asleep, Harry got down on his hands and knees 
and reached toward it. 

“Ouch!” 

The book snapped shut on his hand and then flapped 
past him, still scuttling on its covers. Harry 
scrambled around, threw himself forward, and 



Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




managed to flatten it. Uncle Vernon gave a loud, 
sleepy grunt in the room next door. 

Hedwig and Errol watched interestedly as Harry 
clamped the struggling book tightly in his arms, 
hurried to his chest of drawers, and pulled out a belt, 
which he buckled tightly around it. The Monster Book 
shuddered angrily, but could no longer flap and snap, 
so Harry threw it down on the bed and reached for 
Hagrid’s card. 

Dear Harry, 

Happy birthday! 

Think you might find this useful for next year. 

Won’t say no more here. Tell you when I see you. 

Hope the Muggles are treating you right. 

All the best, 

Hagrid 

It struck Harry as ominous that Hagrid thought a 
biting book would come in useful, but he put Hagrid’s 
card up next to Ron’s and Hermione’s, grinning more 
broadly than ever. Now there was only the letter from 
Hogwarts left. 

Noticing that it was rather thicker than usual, Harry 
slit open the envelope, pulled out the first page of 
parchment within, and read: 

Dear Mr. Potter, 

Please note that the new school year will begin on 
September the first. The Hogwarts Express will leave 

Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




from King’s Cross station, platform nine and three- 
quarters, at eleven o’clock. 

Third years are permitted to visit the village of 
Hogsmeade on certain weekends. Please give the 
enclosed permission form to your parent or guardian to 
sign. 

A list of books for next year is enclosed. 

Yours sincerely, 

Professor M. McGonagall 
Deputy Headmistress 

Harry pulled out the Hogsmeade permission form and 
looked at it, no longer grinning. It would be wonderful 
to visit Hogsmeade on weekends; he knew it was an 
entirely wizarding village, and he had never set foot 
there. But how on earth was he going to persuade 
Uncle Vernon or Aunt Petunia to sign the form? 

He looked over at the alarm clock. It was now two 
o’clock in the morning. 

Deciding that he’d worry about the Hogsmeade form 
when he woke up, Harry got back into bed and 
reached up to cross off another day on the chart he’d 
made for himself, counting down the days left until 
his return to Hogwarts. Then he took off his glasses 
and lay down, eyes open, facing his three birthday 
cards. 

Extremely unusual though he was, at that moment 
Harry Potter felt just like everyone else — glad, for the 
first time in his life, that it was his birthday. 



Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





AUNT MARGE’S BIG MISTAKE 

Harry went down to breakfast the next morning to 
find the three Dursleys already sitting around the 
kitchen table. They were watching a brand-new 
television, a welcome-home-for-the-summer present 
for Dudley, who had been complaining loudly about 
the long walk between the fridge and the television in 
the living room. Dudley had spent most of the 
summer in the kitchen, his piggy little eyes fixed on 
the screen and his five chins wobbling as he ate 
continually. 

Harry sat down between Dudley and Uncle Vernon, a 
large, beefy man with very little neck and a lot of 
mustache. Far from wishing Harry a happy birthday, 
none of the Dursleys made any sign that they had 
noticed Harry enter the room, but Harry was far too 
used to this to care. He helped himself to a piece of 
toast and then looked up at the reporter on the 
television, who was halfway through a report on an 
escaped convict: 



Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



"... The public is warned that Black is armed and 
extremely dangerous. A special hot line has been set 
up, and any sighting of Black should be reported 
immediately.” 

“No need to tell us he’s no good,” snorted Uncle 
Vernon, staring over the top of his newspaper at the 
prisoner. “Look at the state of him, the filthy 
layabout! Look at his hair!” 

He shot a nasty look sideways at Harry, whose untidy 
hair had always been a source of great annoyance to 
Uncle Vernon. Compared to the man on the 
television, however, whose gaunt face was 
surrounded by a matted, elbow-length tangle, Harry 
felt very well groomed indeed. 

The reporter had reappeared. 

“The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries will 
announce today — ” 

“Hang on!” barked Uncle Vernon, staring furiously at 
the reporter. “You didn’t tell us where that maniac’s 
escaped from! What use is that? Lunatic could be 
coming up the street right now!” 

Aunt Petunia, who was bony and horse-faced, 
whipped around and peered intently out of the 
kitchen window. Harry knew Aunt Petunia would 
simply love to be the one to call the hot line number. 
She was the nosiest woman in the world and spent 
most of her life spying on the boring, law-abiding 
neighbors. 

“When will they learn,” said Uncle Vernon, pounding 
the table with his large purple fist, “that hanging’s the 
only way to deal with these people?” 



Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Very true,” said Aunt Petunia, who was still 
squinting into next door’s runner beans. 

Uncle Vernon drained his teacup, glanced at his 
watch, and added, “I’d better be off in a minute, 
Petunia. Marge’s train gets in at ten.” 

Harry, whose thoughts had been upstairs with the 
Broomstick Servicing Kit, was brought back to earth 
with an unpleasant bump. 

“Aunt Marge?” he blurted out. “Sh — she’s not 
coming here, is she?” 

Aunt Marge was Uncle Vernon’s sister. Even though 
she was not a blood relative of Harry’s (whose mother 
had been Aunt Petunia’s sister), he had been forced to 
call her “Aunt” all his life. Aunt Marge lived in the 
country, in a house with a large garden, where she 
bred bulldogs. She didn’t often stay at Privet Drive, 
because she couldn’t bear to leave her precious dogs, 
but each of her visits stood out horribly vividly in 
Harry’s mind. 

At Dudley’s fifth birthday party, Aunt Marge had 
whacked Harry around the shins with her walking 
stick to stop him from beating Dudley at musical 
statues. A few years later, she had turned up at 
Christmas with a computerized robot for Dudley and 
a box of dog biscuits for Harry. On her last visit, the 
year before Harry started at Hogwarts, Harry had 
accidentally trodden on the tail of her favorite dog. 
Ripper had chased Harry out into the garden and up 
a tree, and Aunt Marge had refused to call him off 
until past midnight. The memory of this incident still 
brought tears of laughter to Dudley’s eyes. 

“Marge’ll be here for a week,” Uncle Vernon snarled, 
“and while we’re on the subject” — he pointed a fat 

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




finger threateningly at Harry — “we need to get a few 
things straight before I go and collect her.” 

Dudley smirked and withdrew his gaze from the 
television. Watching Harry being bullied by Uncle 
Vernon was Dudley’s favorite form of entertainment. 

“Firstly,” growled Uncle Vernon, “you’ll keep a civil 
tongue in your head when you’re talking to Marge.” 

“All right,” said Harry bitterly, “if she does when she’s 
talking to me.” 

“Secondly,” said Uncle Vernon, acting as though he 
had not heard Harry’s reply, “as Marge doesn’t know 
anything about your abnormality, I don’t want any — 
any funny stuff while she’s here. You behave yourself, 
got me?” 

“I will if she does,” said Harry through gritted teeth. 

“And thirdly,” said Uncle Vernon, his mean little eyes 
now slits in his great purple face, “we’ve told Marge 
you attend St. Brutus’s Secure Center for Incurably 
Criminal Boys.” 

“What?” Harry yelled. 

“And you’ll be sticking to that story, boy, or there’ll be 
trouble,” spat Uncle Vernon. 

Harry sat there, white-faced and furious, staring at 
Uncle Vernon, hardly able to believe it. Aunt Marge 
coming for a week-long visit — it was the worst 
birthday present the Dursleys had ever given him, 
including that pair of Uncle Vernon’s old socks. 



Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, Petunia,” said Uncle Vernon, getting heavily to 
his feet, “111 be off to the station, then. Want to come 
along for the ride, Dudders?” 

“No,” said Dudley, whose attention had returned to 
the television now that Uncle Vernon had finished 
threatening Harry. 

“Duddy’s got to make himself smart for his auntie,” 
said Aunt Petunia, smoothing Dudley’s thick blond 
hair. “Mummy’s bought him a lovely new bow tie.” 

Uncle Vernon clapped Dudley on his porky shoulder. 

“See you in a bit, then,” he said, and he left the 
kitchen. 

Harry, who had been sitting in a kind of horrified 
trance, had a sudden idea. Abandoning his toast, he 
got quickly to his feet and followed Uncle Vernon to 
the front door. 

Uncle Vernon was pulling on his car coat. 

“I’m not taking you,” he snarled as he turned to see 
Harry watching him. 

“Like I wanted to come,” said Harry coldly. “I want to 
ask you something.” 

Uncle Vernon eyed him suspiciously. 

“Third years at Hog — at my school are allowed to 
visit the village sometimes,” said Harry. 

“So?” snapped Uncle Vernon, taking his car keys from 
a hook next to the door. 



Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I need you to sign the permission form,” said Harry 
in a rush. 

“And why should I do that?” sneered Uncle Vernon. 

“Well,” said Harry, choosing his words carefully, “it’ll 
be hard work, pretending to Aunt Marge I go to that 
St. Whatsits — ” 

“St. Brutus’s Secure Center for Incurably Criminal 
Boys!” bellowed Uncle Vernon, and Harry was pleased 
to hear a definite note of panic in Uncle Vernon’s 
voice. 

“Exactly,” said Harry, looking calmly up into Uncle 
Vernon’s large, purple face. “It’s a lot to remember. I’ll 
have to make it sound convincing, won’t I? What if I 
accidentally let something slip?” 

“ You’ll get the stuffing knocked out of you, won’t you?” 
roared Uncle Vernon, advancing on Harry with his fist 
raised. But Harry stood his ground. 

“Knocking the stuffing out of me won’t make Aunt 
Marge forget what I could tell her,” he said grimly. 

Uncle Vernon stopped, his fist still raised, his face an 
ugly puce. 

“But if you sign my permission form,” Harry went on 
quickly, “I swear I’ll remember where I’m supposed to 
go to school, and I’ll act like a Mug — like I’m normal 
and everything.” 

Harry could tell that Uncle Vernon was thinking it 
over, even if his teeth were bared and a vein was 
throbbing in his temple. 



Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Right,” he snapped finally. “I shall monitor your 
behavior carefully during Marge’s visit. If, at the end 
of it, you’ve toed the line and kept to the story, I’ll 
sign your ruddy form.” 

He wheeled around, pulled open the front door, and 
slammed it so hard that one of the little panes of 
glass at the top fell out. 

Harry didn’t return to the kitchen. He went back 
upstairs to his bedroom. If he was going to act like a 
real Muggle, he’d better start now. Slowly and sadly 
he gathered up all his presents and his birthday 
cards and hid them under the loose floorboard with 
his homework. Then he went to Hedwig’s cage. Errol 
seemed to have recovered; he and Hedwig were both 
asleep, heads under their wings. Harry sighed, then 
poked them both awake. 

“Hedwig,” he said gloomily, “you’re going to have to 
clear off for a week. Go with Errol. Ron’ll look after 
you. I’ll write him a note, explaining. And don’t look at 
me like that” — Hedwig’s large amber eyes were 
reproachful — “it’s not my fault. It’s the only way I’ll 
be allowed to visit Hogsmeade with Ron and 
Hermione.” 

Ten minutes later, Errol and Hedwig (who had a note 
to Ron bound to her leg) soared out of the window 
and out of sight. Harry, now feeling thoroughly 
miserable, put the empty cage away inside the 
wardrobe. 

But Harry didn’t have long to brood. In next to no 
time, Aunt Petunia was shrieking up the stairs for 
Harry to come down and get ready to welcome their 
guest. 



Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Do something about your hair!” Aunt Petunia 
snapped as he reached the hall. 

Harry couldn’t see the point of trying to make his hair 
lie flat. Aunt Marge loved criticizing him, so the 
untidier he looked, the happier she would be. 

All too soon, there was a crunch of gravel outside as 
Uncle Vernon’s car pulled back into the driveway, 
then the clunk of the car doors and footsteps on the 
garden path. 

“Get the door!” Aunt Petunia hissed at Harry. 

A feeling of great gloom in his stomach, Harry pulled 
the door open. 

On the threshold stood Aunt Marge. She was very like 
Uncle Vernon: large, beefy, and purple-faced, she 
even had a mustache, though not as bushy as his. In 
one hand she held an enormous suitcase, and tucked 
under the other was an old and evil-tempered 
bulldog. 

“Where’s my Dudders?” roared Aunt Marge. “Where’s 
my neffy-poo?” 

Dudley came waddling down the hall, his blond hair 
plastered flat to his fat head, a bow tie just visible 
under his many chins. Aunt Marge thrust the 
suitcase into Harry’s stomach, knocking the wind out 
of him, seized Dudley in a tight one-armed hug, and 
planted a large kiss on his cheek. 

Harry knew perfectly well that Dudley only put up 
with Aunt Marge’s hugs because he was well paid for 
it, and sure enough, when they broke apart, Dudley 
had a crisp twenty-pound note clutched in his fat fist. 



Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Petunia!” shouted Aunt Marge, striding past Harry as 
though he was a hat stand. Aunt Marge and Aunt 
Petunia kissed, or rather, Aunt Marge bumped her 
large jaw against Aunt Petunia’s bony cheekbone. 

Uncle Vernon now came in, smiling jovially as he shut 
the door. 

“Tea, Marge?” he said. “And what will Ripper take?” 

“Ripper can have some tea out of my saucer,” said 
Aunt Marge as they all proceeded into the kitchen, 
leaving Harry alone in the hall with the suitcase. But 
Harry wasn’t complaining; any excuse not to be with 
Aunt Marge was fine by him, so he began to heave the 
case upstairs into the spare bedroom, taking as long 
as he could. 

By the time he got back to the kitchen, Aunt Marge 
had been supplied with tea and fruitcake, and Ripper 
was lapping noisily in the corner. Harry saw Aunt 
Petunia wince slightly as specks of tea and drool 
flecked her clean floor. Aunt Petunia hated animals. 

“Who’s looking after the other dogs, Marge?” Uncle 
Vernon asked. 

“Oh, I’ve got Colonel Fubster managing them,” 
boomed Aunt Marge. “He’s retired now, good for him 
to have something to do. But I couldn’t leave poor old 
Ripper. He pines if he’s away from me.” 

Ripper began to growl again as Harry sat down. This 
directed Aunt Marge’s attention to Harry for the first 
time. 

“So!” she barked. “Still here, are you?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. 

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t you say ‘yes’ in that ungrateful tone,” Aunt 
Marge growled. “It’s damn good of Vernon and 
Petunia to keep you. Wouldn’t have done it myself. 
You’d have gone straight to an orphanage if you’d 
been dumped on my doorstep.” 

Harry was bursting to say that he’d rather live in an 
orphanage than with the Dursleys, but the thought of 
the Hogsmeade form stopped him. He forced his face 
into a painful smile. 

“Don’t you smirk at me!” boomed Aunt Marge. “I can 
see you haven’t improved since I last saw you. I hoped 
school would knock some manners into you.” She 
took a large gulp of tea, wiped her mustache, and 
said, “Where is it that you send him, again, Vernon?” 

“St. Brutus’s,” said Uncle Vernon promptly. “It’s a 
first-rate institution for hopeless cases.” 

“I see,” said Aunt Marge. “Do they use the cane at St. 
Brutus’s, boy?” she barked across the table. 

“Er — ” 



Uncle Vernon nodded curtly behind Aunt Marge’s 
back. 

“Yes,” said Harry. Then, feeling he might as well do 
the thing properly, he added, “all the time.” 

“Excellent,” said Aunt Marge. “I won’t have this 
namby-pamby, wishy-washy nonsense about not 
hitting people who deserve it. A good thrashing is 
what’s needed in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred. 
Have you been beaten often?” 

“Oh, yeah,” said Harry, “loads of times.” 



Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Aunt Marge narrowed her eyes. 



“I still don’t like your tone, boy,” she said. “If you can 
speak of your beatings in that casual way, they 
clearly aren’t hitting you hard enough. Petunia, I’d 
write if I were you. Make it clear that you approve the 
use of extreme force in this boy’s case.” 

Perhaps Uncle Vernon was worried that Harry might 
forget their bargain; in any case, he changed the 
subject abruptly. 

“Heard the news this morning, Marge? What about 
that escaped prisoner, eh?” 

As Aunt Marge started to make herself at home, Harry 
caught himself thinking almost longingly of life at 
number four without her. Uncle Vernon and Aunt 
Petunia usually encouraged Harry to stay out of their 
way, which Harry was only too happy to do. Aunt 
Marge, on the other hand, wanted Harry under her 
eye at all times, so that she could boom out 
suggestions for his improvement. She delighted in 
comparing Harry with Dudley, and took huge 
pleasure in buying Dudley expensive presents while 
glaring at Harry, as though daring him to ask why he 
hadn’t got a present too. She also kept throwing out 
dark hints about what made Harry such an 
unsatisfactory person. 

“You mustn’t blame yourself for the way the boy’s 
turned out, Vernon,” she said over lunch on the third 
day. “If there’s something rotten on the inside, there’s 
nothing anyone can do about it.” 

Harry tried to concentrate on his food, but his hands 
shook and his face was starting to burn with anger. 
Remember the form, he told himself. Think about 
Hogsmeade. Don’t say anything. Don’t rise — 

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Aunt Marge reached for her glass of wine. 



“It’s one of the basic rules of breeding,” she said. “You 
see it all the time with dogs. If there’s something 
wrong with the bitch, there’ll be something wrong 
with the pup — ” 

At that moment, the wineglass Aunt Marge was 
holding exploded in her hand. Shards of glass flew in 
every direction and Aunt Marge sputtered and 
blinked, her great ruddy face dripping. 

“Marge!” squealed Aunt Petunia. “Marge, are you all 
right?” 

“Not to worry,” grunted Aunt Marge, mopping her face 
with her napkin. “Must have squeezed it too hard. Did 
the same thing at Colonel Fubster’s the other day. No 
need to fuss, Petunia, I have a very firm grip ...” 

But Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon were both 
looking at Harry suspiciously, so he decided he’d 
better skip dessert and escape from the table as soon 
as he could. 

Outside in the hall, he leaned against the wall, 
breathing deeply. It had been a long time since he’d 
lost control and made something explode. He couldn’t 
afford to let it happen again. The Hogsmeade form 
wasn’t the only thing at stake — if he carried on like 
that, he’d be in trouble with the Ministry of Magic. 

Harry was still an underage wizard, and he was 
forbidden by wizard law to do magic outside school. 
His record wasn’t exactly clean either. Only last 
summer he’d gotten an official warning that had 
stated quite clearly that if the Ministry got wind of 
any more magic in Privet Drive, Harry would face 
expulsion from Hogwarts. 

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He heard the Dursleys leaving the table and hurried 
upstairs out of the way. 

Harry got through the next three days by forcing 
himself to think about his Handbook of Do-It-Yourself 
Broomcare whenever Aunt Marge started on him. This 
worked quite well, though it seemed to give him a 
glazed look, because Aunt Marge started voicing the 
opinion that he was mentally subnormal. 

At last, at long last, the final evening of Marge’s stay 
arrived. Aunt Petunia cooked a fancy dinner and 
Uncle Vernon uncorked several bottles of wine. They 
got all the way through the soup and the salmon 
without a single mention of Harry’s faults; during the 
lemon meringue pie, Uncle Vernon bored them all 
with a long talk about Grunnings, his drill-making 
company; then Aunt Petunia made coffee and Uncle 
Vernon brought out a bottle of brandy. 

“Can I tempt you, Marge?” 

Aunt Marge had already had quite a lot of wine. Her 
huge face was very red. 

“Just a small one, then,” she chuckled. “A bit more 
than that ... and a bit more ... that’s the ticket.” 

Dudley was eating his fourth slice of pie. Aunt 
Petunia was sipping coffee with her little finger 
sticking out. Harry really wanted to disappear into his 
bedroom, but he met Uncle Vernon’s angry little eyes 
and knew he would have to sit it out. 

“Aah,” said Aunt Marge, smacking her lips and 
putting the empty brandy glass back down. “Excellent 
nosh, Petunia. It’s normally just a fry-up for me of an 
evening, with twelve dogs to look after. ...” She 
burped richly and patted her great tweed stomach. 
Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Pardon me. But I do like to see a healthy-sized boy,” 
she went on, winking at Dudley. “You’ll be a proper- 
sized man, Dudders, like your father. Yes, I’ll have a 
spot more brandy, Vernon. ...” 

“Now, this one here — ” 

She jerked her head at Harry, who felt his stomach 
clench. The Handbook, he thought quickly. 

“This one’s got a mean, runty look about him. You get 
that with dogs. I had Colonel Fubster drown one last 
year. Ratty little thing it was. Weak. Underbred.” 

Harry was trying to remember page twelve of his 
book: A Charm to Cure Reluctant Reversers. 

“It all comes down to blood, as I was saying the other 
day. Bad blood will out. Now, I’m saying nothing 
against your family, Petunia” — she patted Aunt 
Petunia’s bony hand with her shovellike one — “but 
your sister was a bad egg. They turn up in the best 
families. Then she ran off with a wastrel and here’s 
the result right in front of us.” 

Harry was staring at his plate, a funny ringing in his 
ears. Grasp your broom firmly by the tail, he thought. 
But he couldn’t remember what came next. Aunt 
Marge’s voice seemed to be boring into him like one of 
Uncle Vernon’s drills. 

“This Potter,” said Aunt Marge loudly, seizing the 
brandy bottle and splashing more into her glass and 
over the tablecloth, “you never told me what he did?” 

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia were looking 
extremely tense. Dudley had even looked up from his 
pie to gape at his parents. 



Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He — didn’t work,” said Uncle Vernon, with half a 
glance at Harry. “Unemployed.” 



“As I expected!” said Aunt Marge, taking a huge swig 
of brandy and wiping her chin on her sleeve. “A no- 
account, good-for-nothing, lazy scrounger who — ” 

“He was not,” said Harry suddenly. The table went 
very quiet. Harry was shaking all over. He had never 
felt so angry in his life. 

“MORE BRANDY!” yelled Uncle Vernon, who had gone 
very white. He emptied the bottle into Aunt Marge’s 
glass. “You, boy,” he snarled at Harry. “Go to bed, go 
on — ” 



“No, Vernon,” hiccuped Aunt Marge, holding up a 
hand, her tiny bloodshot eyes fixed on Harry’s. “Go 
on, boy, go on. Proud of your parents, are you? They 
go and get themselves killed in a car crash (drunk, I 
expect) — ” 

“They didn’t die in a car crash!” said Harry, who 
found himself on his feet. 

“They died in a car crash, you nasty little liar, and left 
you to be a burden on their decent, hardworking 
relatives!” screamed Aunt Marge, swelling with fury. 
“You are an insolent, ungrateful little — ” 

But Aunt Marge suddenly stopped speaking. For a 
moment, it looked as though words had failed her. 

She seemed to be swelling with inexpressible anger — 
but the swelling didn’t stop. Her great red face started 
to expand, her tiny eyes bulged, and her mouth 
stretched too tightly for speech — next second, 
several buttons had just burst from her tweed jacket 
and pinged off the walls — she was inflating like a 
monstrous balloon, her stomach bursting free of her 
Page | 31 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




tweed waistband, each of her fingers blowing up like a 
salami — 

“MARGE!” yelled Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia 
together as Aunt Marge’s whole body began to rise off 
her chair toward the ceiling. She was entirely round, 
now, like a vast life buoy with piggy eyes, and her 
hands and feet stuck out weirdly as she drifted up 
into the air, making apoplectic popping noises. Ripper 
came skidding into the room, barking madly. 

“NOOOOOOO!” 

Uncle Vernon seized one of Marge’s feet and tried to 
pull her down again, but was almost lifted from the 
floor himself. A second later, Ripper leapt forward and 
sank his teeth into Uncle Vernon’s leg. 

Harry tore from the dining room before anyone could 
stop him, heading for the cupboard under the stairs. 
The cupboard door burst magically open as he 
reached it. In seconds, he had heaved his trunk to the 
front door. He sprinted upstairs and threw himself 
under the bed, wrenching up the loose floorboard, 
and grabbed the pillowcase full of his books and 
birthday presents. He wriggled out, seized Hedwig’s 
empty cage, and dashed back downstairs to his 
trunk, just as Uncle Vernon burst out of the dining 
room, his trouser leg in bloody tatters. 

“COME BACK IN HERE!” he bellowed. “COME BACK 
AND PUT HER RIGHT!” 

But a reckless rage had come over Harry. He kicked 
his trunk open, pulled out his wand, and pointed it at 
Uncle Vernon. 

“She deserved it,” Harry said, breathing very fast. 

“She deserved what she got. You keep away from me.” 

Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He fumbled behind him for the latch on the door. 



“I’m going,” Harry said. “I’ve had enough.” 

And in the next moment, he was out in the dark, 
quiet street, heaving his heavy trunk behind him, 
Hedwig’s cage under his arm. 



Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




3 




THE KNIGHT BUS 

Harry was several streets away before he collapsed 
onto a low wall in Magnolia Crescent, panting from 
the effort of dragging his trunk. He sat quite still, 
anger still surging through him, listening to the 
frantic thumping of his heart. 

But after ten minutes alone in the dark street, a new 
emotion overtook him: panic. Whichever way he 
looked at it, he had never been in a worse fix. He was 
stranded, quite alone, in the dark Muggle world, with 
absolutely nowhere to go. And the worst of it was, he 
had just done serious magic, which meant that he 
was almost certainly expelled from Hogwarts. He had 
broken the Decree for the Restriction of Underage 
Wizardry so badly, he was surprised Ministry of Magic 
representatives weren’t swooping down on him where 
he sat. 

Harry shivered and looked up and down Magnolia 
Crescent. What was going to happen to him? Would 
he be arrested, or would he simply be outlawed from 
the wizarding world? He thought of Ron and 

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Hermione, and his heart sank even lower. Harry was 
sure that, criminal or not, Ron and Hermione would 
want to help him now, but they were both abroad, 
and with Hedwig gone, he had no means of contacting 
them. 

He didn’t have any Muggle money, either. There was a 
little wizard gold in the money bag at the bottom of 
his trunk, but the rest of the fortune his parents had 
left him was stored in a vault at Gringotts Wizarding 
Bank in London. He’d never be able to drag his trunk 
all the way to London. Unless ... 

He looked down at his wand, which he was still 
clutching in his hand. If he was already expelled (his 
heart was now thumping painfully fast), a bit more 
magic couldn’t hurt. He had the Invisibility Cloak he 
had inherited from his father — what if he bewitched 
the trunk to make it feather-light, tied it to his 
broomstick, covered himself in the cloak, and flew to 
London? Then he could get the rest of his money out 
of his vault and ... begin his life as an outcast. It was 
a horrible prospect, but he couldn’t sit on this wall 
forever, or he’d find himself trying to explain to 
Muggle police why he was out in the dead of night 
with a trunkful of spellbooks and a broomstick. 

Harry opened his trunk again and pushed the 
contents aside, looking for the Invisibility Cloak — 
but before he had found it, he straightened up 
suddenly, looking around him once more. 

A funny prickling on the back of his neck had made 
Harry feel he was being watched, but the street 
appeared to be deserted, and no lights shone from 
any of the large square houses. 

He bent over his trunk again, but almost immediately 
stood up once more, his hand clenched on his wand. 

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He had sensed rather than heard it: someone or 
something was standing in the narrow gap between 
the garage and the fence behind him. Harry squinted 
at the black alleyway. If only it would move, then he’d 
know whether it was just a stray cat or — something 
else. 

“Lumos,” Harry muttered, and a light appeared at the 
end of his wand, almost dazzling him. He held it high 
over his head, and the pebble-dashed walls of number 
two suddenly sparkled; the garage door gleamed, and 
between them Harry saw, quite distinctly, the hulking 
outline of something very big, with wide, gleaming 
eyes. 

Harry stepped backward. His legs hit his trunk and 
he tripped. His wand flew out of his hand as he flung 
out an arm to break his fall, and he landed, hard, in 
the gutter — 

There was a deafening BANG, and Harry threw up his 
hands to shield his eyes against a sudden blinding 
light — 

With a yell, he rolled back onto the pavement, just in 
time. A second later, a gigantic pair of wheels and 
headlights screeched to a halt exactly where Harry 
had just been lying. They belonged, as Harry saw 
when he raised his head, to a triple-decker, violently 
purple bus, which had appeared out of thin air. Gold 
lettering over the windshield spelled The Knight Bus. 

For a split second, Harry wondered if he had been 
knocked silly by his fall. Then a conductor in a purple 
uniform leapt out of the bus and began to speak 
loudly to the night. 

“Welcome to the Knight Bus, emergency transport for 
the stranded witch or wizard. Just stick out your 

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




wand hand, step on board, and we can take you 
anywhere you want to go. My name is Stan Shunpike, 
and I will be your conductor this eve — ” 

The conductor stopped abruptly. He had just caught 
sight of Harry, who was still sitting on the ground. 
Harry snatched up his wand again and scrambled to 
his feet. Close up, he saw that Stan Shunpike was 
only a few years older than he was, eighteen or 
nineteen at most, with large, protruding ears and 
quite a few pimples. 

“What were you doin’ down there?” said Stan, 
dropping his professional manner. 

“Fell over,” said Harry. 

“ ’Choo fall over for?” sniggered Stan. 

“I didn’t do it on purpose,” said Harry, annoyed. One 
of the knees in his jeans was torn, and the hand he 
had thrown out to break his fall was bleeding. He 
suddenly remembered why he had fallen over and 
turned around quickly to stare at the alleyway 
between the garage and fence. The Knight Bus’s 
headlamps were flooding it with light, and it was 
empty. 

“ ’Choo lookin’ at?” said Stan. 

“There was a big black thing,” said Harry, pointing 
uncertainly into the gap. “Like a dog ... but massive 



He looked around at Stan, whose mouth was slightly 
open. With a feeling of unease, Harry saw Stan’s eyes 
move to the scar on Harry’s forehead. 

“Woss that on your ’ead?” said Stan abruptly. 

Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Nothing,” said Harry quickly, flattening his hair over 
his scar. If the Ministry of Magic was looking for him, 
he didn’t want to make it too easy for them. 

“Woss your name?” Stan persisted. 

“Neville Longbottom,” said Harry, saying the first 
name that came into his head. “So — so this bus,” he 
went on quickly, hoping to distract Stan, “did you say 
it goes anywhere?” 

“Yep,” said Stan proudly, “anywhere you like, long’s 
it’s on land. Can’t do nuffink underwater. ’Ere,” he 
said, looking suspicious again, “you did flag us down, 
dincha? Stuck out your wand ’and, dincha?” 

“Yes,” said Harry quickly. “Listen, how much would it 
be to get to London?” 

“Eleven Sickles,” said Stan, “but for firteen you get ’ot 
chocolate, and for fifteen you get an ’ot water bottle 
an’ a toofbrush in the color of your choice.” 

Harry rummaged once more in his trunk, extracted 
his money bag, and shoved some gold into Stan’s 
hand. He and Stan then lifted his trunk, with 
Hedwig’s cage balanced on top, up the steps of the 
bus. 

There were no seats; instead, half a dozen brass 
bedsteads stood beside the curtained windows. 
Candles were burning in brackets beside each bed, 
illuminating the wood-paneled walls. A tiny wizard in 
a nightcap at the rear of the bus muttered, “Not now, 
thanks, I’m pickling some slugs” and rolled over in his 
sleep. 

“You ’ave this one,” Stan whispered, shoving Harry’s 
trunk under the bed right behind the driver, who was 

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




sitting in an armchair in front of the steering wheel. 
“This is our driver, Ernie Prang. This is Neville 
Longbottom, Ern.” 

Ernie Prang, an elderly wizard wearing very thick 
glasses, nodded to Harry, who nervously flattened his 
bangs again and sat down on his bed. 

“Take ’er away, Ern,” said Stan, sitting down in the 
armchair next to Ernie’s. 

There was another tremendous BANG, and the next 
moment Harry found himself flat on his bed, thrown 
backward by the speed of the Knight Bus. Pulling 
himself up, Harry stared out of the dark window and 
saw that they were now bowling along a completely 
different street. Stan was watching Harry’s stunned 
face with great enjoyment. 

“This is where we was before you flagged us down,” he 
said. “Where are we, Ern? Somewhere in Wales?” 

“Ar,” said Ernie. 

“How come the Muggles don’t hear the bus?” said 
Harry. 

“Them!” said Stan contemptuously. “Don’ listen 
properly, do they? Don’ look properly either. Never 
notice nuffink, they don’.” 

“Best go wake up Madam Marsh, Stan,” said Ern. 
“Well be in Abergavenny in a minute.” 

Stan passed Harry’s bed and disappeared up a 
narrow wooden staircase. Harry was still looking out 
of the window, feeling increasingly nervous. Ernie 
didn’t seem to have mastered the use of a steering 
wheel. The Knight Bus kept mounting the pavement, 
Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




but it didn’t hit anything; lines of lampposts, 
mailboxes, and trash cans jumped out of its way as it 
approached and back into position once it had 
passed. 

Stan came back downstairs, followed by a faintly 
green witch wrapped in a traveling cloak. 

“ ’Ere you go, Madam Marsh,” said Stan happily as 
Ern stamped on the brake and the beds slid a foot or 
so toward the front of the bus. Madam Marsh 
clamped a handkerchief to her mouth and tottered 
down the steps. Stan threw her bag out after her and 
rammed the doors shut; there was another loud 
BANG, and they were thundering down a narrow 
country lane, trees leaping out of the way. 

Harry wouldn’t have been able to sleep even if he had 
been traveling on a bus that didn’t keep banging 
loudly and jumping a hundred miles at a time. His 
stomach churned as he fell back to wondering what 
was going to happen to him, and whether the 
Dursleys had managed to get Aunt Marge off the 
ceiling yet. 

Stan had unfurled a copy of the Daily Prophet and 
was now reading with his tongue between his teeth. A 
large photograph of a sunken-faced man with long, 
matted hair blinked slowly at Harry from the front 
page. He looked strangely familiar. 

“That man!” Harry said, forgetting his troubles for a 
moment. “He was on the Muggle news!” 

Stanley turned to the front page and chuckled. 

“Sirius Black,” he said, nodding. “ ’Course ’e was on 
the Muggle news, Neville, where you been?” 



Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He gave a superior sort of chuckle at the blank look 
on Harry’s face, removed the front page, and handed 
it to Harry. 

“You oughta read the papers more, Neville.” 

Harry held the paper up to the candlelight and read: 
BLACK STILL AT LARGE 

Sirius Black, possibly the most infamous prisoner 
ever to be held in Azkaban fortress, is still eluding 
capture, the Ministry of Magic confirmed today. 

“We are doing all we can to recapture Black,” said the 
Minister of Magic, Cornelius Fudge, this morning, 

“and we beg the magical community to remain calm.” 

Fudge has been criticized by some members of the 
International Federation of Warlocks for informing the 
Muggle Prime Minister of the crisis. 

“Well, really, I had to, don’t you know,” said an 
irritable Fudge. “Black is mad. He’s a danger to 
anyone who crosses him, magic or Muggle. I have the 
Prime Minister’s assurance that he will not breathe a 
word of Black’s true identity to anyone. And let’s face 
it — who’d believe him if he did?” 

While Muggles have been told that Black is carrying a 
gun (a kind of metal wand that Muggles use to kill 
each other), the magical community lives in fear of a 
massacre like that of twelve years ago, when Black 
murdered thirteen people with a single curse. 



Harry looked into the shadowed eyes of Sirius Black, 
the only part of the sunken face that seemed alive. 

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had never met a vampire, but he had seen 
pictures of them in his Defense Against the Dark Arts 
classes, and Black, with his waxy white skin, looked 
just like one. 

“Scary-lookin’ fing, inee?” said Stan, who had been 
watching Harry read. 

“He murdered thirteen people?” said Harry, handing 
the page back to Stan, “with one curse?” 

“Yep,” said Stan, “in front of witnesses an’ all. Broad 
daylight. Big trouble it caused, dinnit, Ern?” 

“Ar,” said Ern darkly. 

Stan swiveled in his armchair, his hands on the back, 
the better to look at Harry. 

“Black woz a big supporter of You-Know-’Oo,” he said. 

“What, Voldemort?” said Harry, without thinking. 

Even Stan’s pimples went white; Ern jerked the 
steering wheel so hard that a whole farmhouse had to 
jump aside to avoid the bus. 

“You outta your tree?” yelped Stan. “ ’Choo say ’is 
name for?” 

“Sorry,” said Harry hastily. “Sorry, I — I forgot — ” 

“Forgot!” said Stan weakly. “Blimey, my ’eart’s goin’ 
that fast...” 

“So — so Black was a supporter of You-Know-Who?” 
Harry prompted apologetically. 



Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah,” said Stan, still rubbing his chest. “Yeah, 
that’s right. Very close to You-Know-’Oo, they say. 
Anyway, when little ’Arry Potter got the better of You- 
Know-’Oo — ” 

Harry nervously flattened his bangs down again. 

“ — all You-Know-’Oo’s supporters was tracked down, 
wasn’t they, Ern? Most of ’em knew it was all over, 
wiv You-Know-’Oo gone, and they came quiet. But not 
Sirius Black. I ’eard he thought ’e’d be second-in- 
command once You-Know-’Oo ’ad taken over. 

“Anyway, they cornered Black in the middle of a street 
full of Muggles an’ Black took out ’is wand and ’e 
blasted ’alf the street apart, an’ a wizard got it, an’ so 
did a dozen Muggles what got in the way. ’Orrible, eh? 
An’ you know what Black did then?” Stan continued 
in a dramatic whisper. 

“What?” said Harry. 

“Laughed,” said Stan. “Jus’ stood there an’ laughed. 
An’ when reinforcements from the Ministry of Magic 
got there, ’e went wiv ’em quiet as anyfink, still 
laughing ’is ’ead off. ’Cos ’e’s mad, inee, Ern? Inee 
mad?” 

“If he weren’t when he went to Azkaban, he will be 
now,” said Ern in his slow voice. “I’d blow meself up 
before I set foot in that place. Serves him right, mind 
you ... after what he did. ...” 

“They ’ad a job coverin’ it up, din’ they, Ern?” Stan 
said. “ ’Ole street blown up an’ all them Muggles 
dead. What was it they said ’ad ’appened, Ern?” 

“Gas explosion,” grunted Ernie. 



Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“An’ now ’e’s out,” said Stan, examining the 
newspaper picture of Black’s gaunt face again. “Never 
been a breakout from Azkaban before, ’as there, Ern? 
Beats me ’ow ’e did it. Frightenin’, eh? Mind, I don’t 
fancy ’is chances against them Azkaban guards, eh, 
Ern?” 

Ernie suddenly shivered. 

“Talk about summat else, Stan, there’s a good lad. 
Them Azkaban guards give me the collywobbles.” 

Stan put the paper away reluctantly, and Harry 
leaned against the window of the Knight Bus, feeling 
worse than ever. He couldn’t help imagining what 
Stan might be telling his passengers in a few nights’ 
time. 

“ ’Ear about that ’Arry Potter? Blew up ’is aunt! We 
’ad ’im ’ere on the Knight Bus, di’n’t we, Ern? ’E was 
tryin’ to run for it. ...” 

He, Harry, had broken wizard law just like Sirius 
Black. Was inflating Aunt Marge bad enough to land 
him in Azkaban? Harry didn’t know anything about 
the wizard prison, though everyone he’d ever heard 
speak of it did so in the same fearful tone. Hagrid, the 
Hogwarts gamekeeper, had spent two months there 
only last year. Harry wouldn’t soon forget the look of 
terror on Hagrid ’s face when he had been told where 
he was going, and Hagrid was one of the bravest 
people Harry knew. 

The Knight Bus rolled through the darkness, 
scattering bushes and wastebaskets, telephone 
booths and trees, and Harry lay, restless and 
miserable, on his feather bed. After a while, Stan 
remembered that Harry had paid for hot chocolate, 
but poured it all over Harry’s pillow when the bus 
Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




moved abruptly from Anglesey to Aberdeen. One by 
one, wizards and witches in dressing gowns and 
slippers descended from the upper floors to leave the 
bus. They all looked very pleased to go. 

Finally, Harry was the only passenger left. 

“Right then, Neville,” said Stan, clapping his hands, 
“whereabouts in London?” 

“Diagon Alley,” said Harry. 

“Righto,” said Stan. “ ’Old tight, then ...” 

BANG! 

They were thundering along Charing Cross Road. 
Harry sat up and watched buildings and benches 
squeezing themselves out of the Knight Bus’s way. 

The sky was getting a little lighter. He would lie low 
for a couple of hours, go to Gringotts the moment it 
opened, then set off — where, he didn’t know. 

Ern slammed on the brakes and the Knight Bus 
skidded to a halt in front of a small and shabby- 
looking pub, the Leaky Cauldron, behind which lay 
the magical entrance to Diagon Alley. 

“Thanks,” Harry said to Ern. 

He jumped down the steps and helped Stan lower his 
trunk and Hedwig’s cage onto the pavement. 

“Well,” said Harry. “ ’Bye then!” 

But Stan wasn’t paying attention. Still standing in the 
doorway to the bus, he was goggling at the shadowy 
entrance to the Leaky Cauldron. 



Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ There you are, Harry,” said a voice. 



Before Harry could turn, he felt a hand on his 
shoulder. At the same time, Stan shouted, “Blimey! 
Ern, come ’ere! Come ’ere!” 

Harry looked up at the owner of the hand on his 
shoulder and felt a bucketful of ice cascade into his 
stomach — he had walked right into Cornelius Fudge, 
the Minister of Magic himself. 

Stan leapt onto the pavement beside them. 

“What didja call Neville, Minister?” he said excitedly. 

Fudge, a portly little man in a long, pinstriped cloak, 
looked cold and exhausted. 

“Neville?” he repeated, frowning. “This is Harry 
Potter.” 

“I knew it!” Stan shouted gleefully. “Ern! Ern! Guess 
’oo Neville is, Ern! ’E’s ’Arry Potter! I can see ’is scar!” 

“Yes,” said Fudge testily, “well, I’m very glad the 
Knight Bus picked Harry up, but he and I need to 
step inside the Leaky Cauldron now ...” 

Fudge increased the pressure on Harry’s shoulder, 
and Harry found himself being steered inside the pub. 
A stooping figure bearing a lantern appeared through 
the door behind the bar. It was Tom, the wizened, 
toothless landlord. 

“You’ve got him, Minister!” said Tom. “Will you be 
wanting anything? Beer? Brandy?” 

“Perhaps a pot of tea,” said Fudge, who still hadn’t let 
go of Harry. 

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was a loud scraping and puffing from behind 
them, and Stan and Ern appeared, carrying Harry’s 
trunk and Hedwig’s cage and looking around 
excitedly. 

“ ’Ow come you di’n’t tell us ’oo you are, eh, Neville?” 
said Stan, beaming at Harry, while Ernie’s owlish face 
peered interestedly over Stan’s shoulder. 

“And a private parlor, please, Tom,” said Fudge 
pointedly. 

“ ’Bye,” Harry said miserably to Stan and Ern as Tom 
beckoned Fudge toward the passage that led from the 
bar. 

“ ’Bye, Neville!” called Stan. 

Fudge marched Harry along the narrow passage after 
Tom’s lantern, and then into a small parlor. Tom 
clicked his fingers, a fire burst into life in the grate, 
and he bowed himself out of the room. 

“Sit down, Harry,” said Fudge, indicating a chair by 
the fire. 

Harry sat down, feeling goose bumps rising up his 
arms despite the glow of the fire. Fudge took off his 
pinstriped cloak and tossed it aside, then hitched up 
the trousers of his bottle-green suit and sat down 
opposite Harry. 

“I am Cornelius Fudge, Harry. The Minister of Magic.” 

Harry already knew this, of course; he had seen 
Fudge once before, but as he had been wearing his 
father’s Invisibility Cloak at the time, Fudge wasn’t to 
know that. 



Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Tom the innkeeper reappeared, wearing an apron over 
his nightshirt and bearing a tray of tea and crumpets. 
He placed the tray on a table between Fudge and 
Harry and left the parlor, closing the door behind 
him. 

“Well, Harry,” said Fudge, pouring out tea, “you’ve 
had us all in a right flap, I don’t mind telling you. 
Running away from your aunt and uncle’s house like 
that! I’d started to think ... but you’re safe, and that’s 
what matters.” 

Fudge buttered himself a crumpet and pushed the 
plate toward Harry. 

“Eat, Harry, you look dead on your feet. Now then ... 
You will be pleased to hear that we have dealt with 
the unfortunate blowing-up of Miss Marjorie Dursley. 
Two members of the Accidental Magic Reversal Squad 
were dispatched to Privet Drive a few hours ago. Miss 
Dursley has been punctured and her memory has 
been modified. She has no recollection of the incident 
at all. So that’s that, and no harm done.” 

Fudge smiled at Harry over the rim of his teacup, 
rather like an uncle surveying a favorite nephew. 
Harry, who couldn’t believe his ears, opened his 
mouth to speak, couldn’t think of anything to say, 
and closed it again. 

“Ah, you’re worrying about the reaction of your aunt 
and uncle?” said Fudge. “Well, I won’t deny that they 
are extremely angry, Harry, but they are prepared to 
take you back next summer as long as you stay at 
Hogwarts for the Christmas and Easter holidays.” 

Harry unstuck his throat. 



Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I always stay at Hogwarts for the Christmas and 
Easter holidays,” he said, “and I don’t ever want to go 
back to Privet Drive.” 

“Now, now, I’m sure you’ll feel differently once you’ve 
calmed down,” said Fudge in a worried tone. “They 
are your family, after all, and I’m sure you are fond of 
each other — er — very deep down.” 

It didn’t occur to Harry to put Fudge right. He was 
still waiting to hear what was going to happen to him 
now. 

“So all that remains,” said Fudge, now buttering 
himself a second crumpet, “is to decide where you’re 
going to spend the last three weeks of your vacation. I 
suggest you take a room here at the Leaky Cauldron 
and — ” 

“Hang on,” blurted Harry. “What about my 
punishment?” 

Fudge blinked. 

“Punishment?” 

“I broke the law!” Harry said. “The Decree for the 
Restriction of Underage Wizardry!” 

“Oh, my dear boy, we’re not going to punish you for a 
little thing like that!” cried Fudge, waving his crumpet 
impatiently. “It was an accident! We don’t send people 
to Azkaban just for blowing up their aunts!” 

But this didn’t tally at all with Harry’s past dealings 
with the Ministry of Magic. 

“Last year, I got an official warning just because a 
house-elf smashed a pudding in my uncle’s house!” 

Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




he told Fudge, frowning. “The Ministry of Magic said 
I’d be expelled from Hogwarts if there was any more 
magic there!” 

Unless Harry’s eyes were deceiving him, Fudge was 
suddenly looking awkward. 

“Circumstances change, Harry. ... We have to take 
into account ... in the present climate . . . Surely you 
don’t want to be expelled?” 

“Of course I don’t,” said Harry. 

“Well then, what’s all the fuss about?” laughed Fudge. 
“Now, have a crumpet, Harry, while I go and see if 
Tom’s got a room for you.” 

Fudge strode out of the parlor and Harry stared after 
him. There was something extremely odd going on. 
Why had Fudge been waiting for him at the Leaky 
Cauldron, if not to punish him for what he’d done? 
And now Harry came to think of it, surely it wasn’t 
usual for the Minister of Magic himself to get involved 
in matters of underage magic? 

Fudge came back, accompanied by Tom the 
innkeeper. 

“Room eleven’s free, Harry,” said Fudge. “I think you’ll 
be very comfortable. Just one thing, and I’m sure 
you’ll understand ... I don’t want you wandering off 
into Muggle London, all right? Keep to Diagon Alley. 
And you’re to be back here before dark each night. 
Sure you’ll understand. Tom will be keeping an eye on 
you for me.” 

“Okay,” said Harry slowly, “but why — ?” 



Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t want to lose you again, do we?” said Fudge 
with a hearty laugh. “No, no ... best we know where 
you are. ... I mean ...” 

Fudge cleared his throat loudly and picked up his 
pinstriped cloak. 

“Well, I’ll be off, plenty to do, you know. ...” 

“Have you had any luck with Black yet?” Harry asked. 

Fudge’s finger slipped on the silver fastenings of his 
cloak. 

“What’s that? Oh, you’ve heard — well, no, not yet, 
but it’s only a matter of time. The Azkaban guards 
have never yet failed ... and they are angrier than I’ve 
ever seen them.” 

Fudge shuddered slightly. 

“So, I’ll say good-bye.” 

He held out his hand and Harry, shaking it, had a 
sudden idea. 

“Er — Minister? Can I ask you something?” 

“Certainly,” said Fudge with a smile. 

“Well, third years at Hogwarts are allowed to visit 
Hogsmeade, but my aunt and uncle didn’t sign the 
permission form. D’you think you could — ?” 

Fudge was looking uncomfortable. 

“Ah,” he said. “No, no, I’m very sorry, Harry, but as 
I’m not your parent or guardian — ” 



Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But you’re the Minister of Magic,” said Harry eagerly. 
“If you gave me permission — ” 

“No, I’m sorry, Harry, but rules are rules,” said Fudge 
flatly. “Perhaps you’ll be able to visit Hogsmeade next 
year. In fact, I think it’s best if you don’t ... yes ... 
well, I’ll be off. Enjoy your stay, Harry.” 

And with a last smile and shake of Harry’s hand, 
Fudge left the room. Tom now moved forward, 
beaming at Harry. 

“If you’ll follow me, Mr. Potter,” he said, “I’ve already 
taken your things up. ...” 

Harry followed Tom up a handsome wooden staircase 
to a door with a brass number eleven on it, which 
Tom unlocked and opened for him. 

Inside was a very comfortable-looking bed, some 
highly polished oak furniture, a cheerfully crackling 
fire and, perched on top of the wardrobe — 

“Hedwig!” Harry gasped. 

The snowy owl clicked her beak and fluttered down 
onto Harry’s arm. 

“Very smart owl you’ve got there,” chuckled Tom. 
“Arrived about five minutes after you did. If there’s 
anything you need, Mr. Potter, don’t hesitate to ask.” 

He gave another bow and left. 

Harry sat on his bed for a long time, absentmindedly 
stroking Hedwig. The sky outside the window was 
changing rapidly from deep, velvety blue to cold, 
steely gray and then, slowly, to pink shot with gold. 
Harry could hardly believe that he’d left Privet Drive 
Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




only a few hours ago, that he wasn’t expelled, and 
that he was now facing three Dursley-free weeks. 



“It’s been a very weird night, Hedwig,” he yawned. 

And without even removing his glasses, he slumped 
back onto his pillows and fell asleep. 



Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE LEAKY CAULDRON 

It took Harry several days to get used to his strange 
new freedom. Never before had he been able to get up 
whenever he wanted or eat whatever he fancied. He 
could even go wherever he pleased, as long as it was 
in Diagon Alley, and as this long cobbled street was 
packed with the most fascinating wizarding shops in 
the world, Harry felt no desire to break his word to 
Fudge and stray back into the Muggle world. 

Harry ate breakfast each morning in the Leaky 
Cauldron, where he liked watching the other guests: 
funny little witches from the country, up for a day’s 
shopping; venerable-looking wizards arguing over the 
latest article in Transfiguration Today; wild-looking 
warlocks; raucous dwarfs; and once, what looked 
suspiciously like a hag, who ordered a plate of raw 
liver from behind a thick woollen balaclava. 

After breakfast Harry would go out into the backyard, 
take out his wand, tap the third brick from the left 
above the trash bin, and stand back as the archway 
into Diagon Alley opened in the wall. 

Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Harry spent the long sunny days exploring the shops 
and eating under the brightly colored umbrellas 
outside cafes, where his fellow diners were showing 
one another their purchases (“it’s a lunascope, old 
boy — no more messing around with moon charts, 
see?”) or else discussing the case of Sirius Black 
(“personally, I won’t let any of the children out alone 
until he’s back in Azkaban”). Harry didn’t have to do 
his homework under the blankets by flashlight 
anymore; now he could sit in the bright sunshine 
outside Florean Fortescue’s Ice Cream Parlor, 
finishing all his essays with occasional help from 
Florean Fortescue himself, who, apart from knowing a 
great deal about medieval witch burnings, gave Harry 
free sundaes every half an hour. 

Once Harry had refilled his money bag with gold 
Galleons, silver Sickles, and bronze Knuts from his 
vault at Gringotts, he had to exercise a lot of self- 
control not to spend the whole lot at once. He had to 
keep reminding himself that he had five years to go at 
Hogwarts, and how it would feel to ask the Dursleys 
for money for spellbooks, to stop himself from buying 
a handsome set of solid gold Gobstones (a wizarding 
game rather like marbles, in which the stones squirt a 
nasty-smelling liquid into the other player’s face when 
they lose a point). He was sorely tempted, too, by the 
perfect, moving model of the galaxy in a large glass 
ball, which would have meant he never had to take 
another Astronomy lesson. But the thing that tested 
Harry’s resolution most appeared in his favorite shop, 
Quality Quidditch Supplies, a week after he’d arrived 
at the Leaky Cauldron. 

Curious to know what the crowd in the shop was 
staring at, Harry edged his way inside and squeezed 
in among the excited witches and wizards until he 
glimpsed a newly erected podium, on which was 



Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




mounted the most magnificent broom he had ever 
seen in his life. 

“Just come out — prototype — ” a square-jawed 
wizard was telling his companion. 

“It’s the fastest broom in the world, isn’t it, Dad?” 
squeaked a boy younger than Harry, who was 
swinging off his father’s arm. 

“Irish International Side’s just put in an order for 
seven of these beauties!” the proprietor of the shop 
told the crowd. “And they’re favorites for the World 
Cup!” 

A large witch in front of Harry moved, and he was 
able to read the sign next to the broom: 

THE FIREBOLT 

This state-of-the-art racing broom sports a stream- 
lined, superfine handle of ash, treated with a 
diamond-hard polish and hand-numbered with its 
own registration number. Each individually selected 
birch twig in the broomtail has been honed to 
aerodynamic perfection, giving the Firebolt 
unsurpassable balance and pinpoint precision. The 
Firebolt has an acceleration of 150 miles an hour in 
ten seconds and incorporates an unbreakable 
Braking Charm. Price on request. 

Price on request ... Harry didn’t like to think how 
much gold the Firebolt would cost. He had never 
wanted anything as much in his whole life — but he 
had never lost a Quidditch match on his Nimbus Two 
Thousand, and what was the point in emptying his 
Gringotts vault for the Firebolt, when he had a very 
good broom already? Harry didn’t ask for the price, 



Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




but he returned, almost every day after that, just to 
look at the Firebolt. 

There were, however, things that Harry needed to 
buy. He went to the Apothecary to replenish his store 
of potions ingredients, and as his school robes were 
now several inches too short in the arm and leg, he 
visited Madam Malkin’s Robes for All Occasions and 
bought new ones. Most important of all, he had to 
buy his new schoolbooks, which would include those 
for his two new subjects, Care of Magical Creatures 
and Divination. 

Harry got a surprise as he looked in at the bookshop 
window. Instead of the usual display of gold- 
embossed spellbooks the size of paving slabs, there 
was a large iron cage behind the glass that held about 
a hundred copies of The Monster Book of Monsters. 
Torn pages were flying everywhere as the books 
grappled with each other, locked together in furious 
wrestling matches and snapping aggressively. 

Harry pulled his booklist out of his pocket and 
consulted it for the first time. The Monster Book of 
Monsters was listed as the required book for Care of 
Magical Creatures. Now Harry understood why Hagrid 
had said it would come in useful. He felt relieved; he 
had been wondering whether Hagrid wanted help with 
some terrifying new pet. 

As Harry entered Flourish and Blotts, the manager 
came hurrying toward him. 

“Hogwarts?” he said abruptly. “Come to get your new 
books?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, “I need — ” 



Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get out of the way,” said the manager impatiently, 
brushing Harry aside. He drew on a pair of very thick 
gloves, picked up a large, knobbly walking stick, and 
proceeded toward the door of the Monster Books’ cage. 

“Hang on,” said Harry quickly, “I’ve already got one of 
those.” 

“Have you?” A look of enormous relief spread over the 
manager’s face. “Thank heavens for that. I’ve been 
bitten five times already this morning — ” 

A loud ripping noise rent the air; two of the Monster 
Books had seized a third and were pulling it apart. 

“Stop it! Stop it!” cried the manager, poking the 
walking stick through the bars and knocking the 
books apart. “I’m never stocking them again, never! 

It’s been bedlam! I thought we’d seen the worst when 
we bought two hundred copies of the Invisible Book of 
Invisibility — cost a fortune, and we never found 
them. ... Well ... is there anything else I can help you 
with?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, looking down his booklist, “I need 
Unfogging the Future by Cassandra Vablatsky.” 

“Ah, starting Divination, are you?” said the manager, 
stripping off his gloves and leading Harry into the 
back of the shop, where there was a corner devoted to 
fortune-telling. A small table was stacked with 
volumes such as Predicting the Unpredictable: Insulate 
Yourself Against Shocks and Broken Balls: When 
Fortunes Turn Foul. 

“Here you are,” said the manager, who had climbed a 
set of steps to take down a thick, black-bound book. 
“Unfogging the Future. Very good guide to all your 



Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




basic fortune-telling methods — palmistry, crystal 
balls, bird entrails — ” 

But Harry wasn’t listening. His eyes had fallen on 
another book, which was among a display on a small 
table: Death Omens: What to Do When You Know the 
Worst Is Coming. 

“Oh, I wouldn’t read that if I were you,” said the 
manager lightly, looking to see what Harry was 
staring at. “You’ll start seeing death omens 
everywhere. It’s enough to frighten anyone to death.” 

But Harry continued to stare at the front cover of the 
book; it showed a black dog large as a bear, with 
gleaming eyes. It looked oddly familiar. ... 

The manager pressed Unfogging the Future into 
Harry’s hands. 

“Anything else?” he said. 

“Yes,” said Harry, tearing his eyes away from the 
dog’s and dazedly consulting his booklist. “Er — I 
need Intermediate Transfiguration and The Standard 
Book of Spells, Grade Three.” 

Harry emerged from Flourish and Blotts ten minutes 
later with his new books under his arms and made 
his way back to the Leaky Cauldron, hardly noticing 
where he was going and bumping into several people. 

He tramped up the stairs to his room, went inside, 
and tipped his books onto his bed. Somebody had 
been in to tidy; the windows were open and sun was 
pouring inside. Harry could hear the buses rolling by 
in the unseen Muggle street behind him and the 
sound of the invisible crowd below in Diagon Alley. He 
caught sight of himself in the mirror over the basin. 
Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It can’t have been a death omen,” he told his 
reflection defiantly. “I was panicking when I saw that 
thing in Magnolia Crescent. ... It was probably just a 
stray dog. ...” 

He raised his hand automatically and tried to make 
his hair lie flat. 

“You’re fighting a losing battle there, dear,” said his 
mirror in a wheezy voice. 

As the days slipped by, Harry started looking 
wherever he went for a sign of Ron or Hermione. 

Plenty of Hogwarts students were arriving in Diagon 
Alley now, with the start of term so near. Harry met 
Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, his fellow 
Gryffindors, in Quality Quidditch Supplies, where 
they too were ogling the Firebolt; he also ran into the 
real Neville Longbottom, a round-faced, forgetful boy, 
outside Flourish and Blotts. Harry didn’t stop to chat; 
Neville appeared to have mislaid his booklist and was 
being told off by his very formidable-looking 
grandmother. Harry hoped she never found out that 
he’d pretended to be Neville while on the run from the 
Ministry of Magic. 

Harry woke on the last day of the holidays, thinking 
that he would at least meet Ron and Hermione 
tomorrow, on the Hogwarts Express. He got up, 
dressed, went for a last look at the Firebolt, and was 
just wondering where he’d have lunch, when someone 
yelled his name and he turned. 

“Harry! HARRY!” 

They were there, both of them, sitting outside Florean 
Fortescue’s Ice Cream Parlor — Ron looking 
incredibly freckly, Hermione very brown, both waving 
frantically at him. 

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Finally!” said Ron, grinning at Harry as he sat down. 
“We went to the Leaky Cauldron, but they said you’d 
left, and we went to Flourish and Blotts, and Madam 
Malkin’s, and — ” 

“I got all my school stuff last week,” Harry explained. 
“And how come you knew I’m staying at the Leaky 
Cauldron?” 

“Dad,” said Ron simply. 

Mr. Weasley, who worked at the Ministry of Magic, 
would of course have heard the whole story of what 
had happened to Aunt Marge. 

“Did you really blow up your aunt, Harry?” said 
Hermione in a very serious voice. 

“I didn’t mean to,” said Harry while Ron roared with 
laughter. “I just — lost control.” 

“It’s not funny, Ron,” said Hermione sharply. 
“Honestly, I’m amazed Harry wasn’t expelled.” 

“So am I,” admitted Harry. “Forget expelled, I thought 
I was going to be arrested.” He looked at Ron. “Your 
dad doesn’t know why Fudge let me off, does he?” 

“Probably ’cause it’s you, isn’t it?” shrugged Ron, still 
chuckling. “Famous Harry Potter and all that. I’d hate 
to see what the Ministry’d do to me if I blew up an 
aunt. Mind you, they’d have to dig me up first, 
because Mum would’ve killed me. Anyway, you can 
ask Dad yourself this evening. We’re staying at the 
Leaky Cauldron tonight too! So you can come to 
King’s Cross with us tomorrow! Hermione’s there as 
well!” 



Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione nodded, beaming. “Mum and Dad dropped 
me off this morning with all my Hogwarts things.” 

“Excellent!” said Harry happily. “So, have you got all 
your new books and stuff?” 

“Look at this,” said Ron, pulling a long thin box out of 
a bag and opening it. “Brand-new wand. Fourteen 
inches, willow, containing one unicorn tail-hair. And 
we’ve got all our books — ” He pointed at a large bag 
under his chair. “What about those Monster Books, 
eh? The assistant nearly cried when we said we 
wanted two.” 

“What’s all that, Hermione?” Harry asked, pointing at 
not one but three bulging bags in the chair next to 
her. 

“Well, I’m taking more new subjects than you, aren’t 
I?” said Hermione. “Those are my books for 
Arithmancy, Care of Magical Creatures, Divination, 
Study of Ancient Runes, Muggle Studies — ” 

“What are you doing Muggle Studies for?” said Ron, 
rolling his eyes at Harry. “You’re Muggle-born! Your 
mum and dad are Muggles! You already know all 
about Muggles!” 

“But it’ll be fascinating to study them from the 
wizarding point of view,” said Hermione earnestly. 

“Are you planning to eat or sleep at all this year, 
Hermione?” asked Harry, while Ron sniggered. 
Hermione ignored them. 

“I’ve still got ten Galleons,” she said, checking her 
purse. “It’s my birthday in September, and Mum and 
Dad gave me some money to get myself an early 
birthday present.” 

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“How about a nice book?” said Ron innocently. 

“No, I don’t think so,” said Hermione composedly. “I 
really want an owl. I mean, Harry’s got Hedwig and 
you’ve got Errol — ” 

“I haven’t,” said Ron. “Errol’s a family owl. All I’ve got 
is Scabbers.” He pulled his pet rat out of his pocket. 
“And I want to get him checked over,” he added, 
placing Scabbers on the table in front of them. “I 
don’t think Egypt agreed with him.” 

Scabbers was looking thinner than usual, and there 
was a definite droop to his whiskers. 

“There’s a magical creature shop just over there,” said 
Harry, who knew Diagon Alley very well by now. “You 
could see if they’ve got anything for Scabbers, and 
Hermione can get her owl.” 

So they paid for their ice cream and crossed the street 
to the Magical Menagerie. 

There wasn’t much room inside. Every inch of wall 
was hidden by cages. It was smelly and very noisy 
because the occupants of these cages were all 
squeaking, squawking, jabbering, or hissing. The 
witch behind the counter was already advising a 
wizard on the care of double-ended newts, so Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione waited, examining the cages. 

A pair of enormous purple toads sat gulping wetly 
and feasting on dead blowflies. A gigantic tortoise 
with a jewel-encrusted shell was glittering near the 
window. Poisonous orange snails were oozing slowly 
up the side of their glass tank, and a fat white rabbit 
kept changing into a silk top hat and back again with 
a loud popping noise. Then there were cats of every 
color, a noisy cage of ravens, a basket of funny 
Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




custard-colored furballs that were humming loudly, 
and on the counter, a vast cage of sleek black rats 
that were playing some sort of skipping game using 
their long, bald tails. 

The double-ended newt wizard left, and Ron 
approached the counter. 

“It’s my rat,” he told the witch. “He been a bit off-color 
ever since I brought him back from Egypt.” 

“Bang him on the counter,” said the witch, pulling a 
pair of heavy black spectacles out of her pocket. 

Ron lifted Scabbers out of his inside pocket and 
placed him next to the cage of his fellow rats, who 
stopped their skipping tricks and scuffled to the wire 
for a better look. 

Like nearly everything Ron owned, Scabbers the rat 
was secondhand (he had once belonged to Ron’s 
brother Percy) and a bit battered. Next to the glossy 
rats in the cage, he looked especially woebegone. 

“Hm,” said the witch, picking up Scabbers. “How old 
is this rat?” 

“Dunno,” said Ron. “Quite old. He used to belong to 
my brother.” 

“What powers does he have?” said the witch, 
examining Scabbers closely. 

“Er — ” The truth was that Scabbers had never shown 
the faintest trace of interesting powers. The witch’s 
eyes moved from Scabbers ’s tattered left ear to his 
front paw, which had a toe missing, and tutted 
loudly. 



Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He’s been through the mill, this one,” she said. 



“He was like that when Percy gave him to me,” said 
Ron defensively. 

“An ordinary common or garden rat like this can’t be 
expected to live longer than three years or so,” said 
the witch. “Now, if you were looking for something a 
bit more hard-wearing, you might like one of these — ” 

She indicated the black rats, who promptly started 
skipping again. Ron muttered, “Show-offs.” 

“Well, if you don’t want a replacement, you can try 
this rat tonic,” said the witch, reaching under the 
counter and bringing out a small red bottle. 

“Okay,” said Ron. “How much — OUCH!” 

Ron buckled as something huge and orange came 
soaring from the top of the highest cage, landed on 
his head, and then propelled itself, spitting madly, at 
Scabbers. 

“NO, CROOKSHANKS, NO!” cried the witch, but 
Scabbers shot from between her hands like a bar of 
soap, landed splay-legged on the floor, and then 
scampered for the door. 

“Scabbers!” Ron shouted, racing out of the shop after 
him; Harry followed. 

It took them nearly ten minutes to catch Scabbers, 
who had taken refuge under a wastepaper bin outside 
Quality Quidditch Supplies. Ron stuffed the trembling 
rat back into his pocket and straightened up, 
massaging his head. 

“What was that?” 

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It was either a very big cat or quite a small tiger,” 
said Harry. 

“Where’s Hermione?” 

“Probably getting her owl — ” 

They made their way back up the crowded street to 
the Magical Menagerie. As they reached it, Hermione 
came out, but she wasn’t carrying an owl. Her arms 
were clamped tightly around the enormous ginger cat. 

“You bought that monster?” said Ron, his mouth 
hanging open. 

“He’s gorgeous, isn’t he?” said Hermione, glowing. 

That was a matter of opinion, thought Harry. The 
cat’s ginger fur was thick and fluffy, but it was 
definitely a bit bowlegged and its face looked grumpy 
and oddly squashed, as though it had run headlong 
into a brick wall. Now that Scabbers was out of sight, 
however, the cat was purring contentedly in 
Hermione ’s arms. 

“Hermione, that thing nearly scalped me!” said Ron. 

“He didn’t mean to, did you, Crookshanks?” said 
Hermione. 

“And what about Scabbers?” said Ron, pointing at the 
lump in his chest pocket. “He needs rest and 
relaxation! How’s he going to get it with that thing 
around?” 

“That reminds me, you forgot your rat tonic,” said 
Hermione, slapping the small red bottle into Ron’s 
hand. “And stop worrying, Crookshanks will be 
sleeping in my dormitory and Scabbers in yours, 

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




what’s the problem? Poor Crookshanks, that witch 
said he’d been in there for ages; no one wanted him.” 

“I wonder why,” said Ron sarcastically as they set off 
toward the Leaky Cauldron. 

They found Mr. Weasley sitting in the bar, reading the 
Daily Prophet. 

“Harry!” he said, smiling as he looked up. “How are 
you?” 

“Fine, thanks,” said Harry as he, Ron, and Hermione 
joined Mr. Weasley with all their shopping. 

Mr. Weasley put down his paper, and Harry saw the 
now familiar picture of Sirius Black staring up at him. 

“They still haven’t caught him, then?” he asked. 

“No,” said Mr. Weasley, looking extremely grave. 
“They’ve pulled us all off our regular jobs at the 
Ministry to try and find him, but no luck so far.” 

“Would we get a reward if we caught him?” asked 
Ron. “It’d be good to get some more money — ” 

“Don’t be ridiculous, Ron,” said Mr. Weasley, who on 
closer inspection looked very strained. “Black’s not 
going to be caught by a thirteen-year-old wizard. It’s 
the Azkaban guards who’ll get him back, you mark 
my words.” 

At that moment Mrs. Weasley entered the bar, laden 
with shopping bags and followed by the twins, Fred 
and George, who were about to start their fifth year at 
Hogwarts; the newly elected Head Boy, Percy; and the 
Weasleys’ youngest child and only girl, Ginny. 



Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ginny, who had always been very taken with Harry, 
seemed even more heartily embarrassed than usual 
when she saw him, perhaps because he had saved 
her life during their previous year at Hogwarts. She 
went very red and muttered “hello” without looking at 
him. Percy, however, held out his hand solemnly as 
though he and Harry had never met and said, “Harry. 
How nice to see you.” 

“Hello, Percy,” said Harry, trying not to laugh. 

“I hope you’re well?” said Percy pompously, shaking 
hands. It was rather like being introduced to the 
mayor. 

“Very well, thanks — ” 

“Harry!” said Fred, elbowing Percy out of the way and 
bowing deeply. “Simply splendid to see you, old boy — 



“Marvelous,” said George, pushing Fred aside and 
seizing Harry’s hand in turn. “Absolutely spiffing.” 

Percy scowled. 

“That’s enough, now,” said Mrs. Weasley. 

“Mum!” said Fred as though he’d only just spotted her 
and seizing her hand too. “How really corking to see 
you — ” 

“I said, that’s enough,” said Mrs. Weasley, depositing 
her shopping in an empty chair. “Hello, Harry, dear. I 
suppose you’ve heard our exciting news?” She pointed 
to the brand-new silver badge on Percy’s chest. 
“Second Head Boy in the family!” she said, swelling 
with pride. 



Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And last,” Fred muttered under his breath. 



“I don’t doubt that,” said Mrs. Weasley, frowning 
suddenly. “I notice they haven’t made you two 
prefects.” 

“What do we want to be prefects for?” said George, 
looking revolted at the very idea. “It’d take all the fun 
out of life.” 

Ginny giggled. 

“You want to set a better example for your sister!” 
snapped Mrs. Weasley. 

“Ginny’s got other brothers to set her an example, 
Mother,” said Percy loftily. “I’m going up to change for 
dinner. ...” 

He disappeared and George heaved a sigh. 

“We tried to shut him in a pyramid,” he told Harry. 
“But Mum spotted us.” 

Dinner that night was a very enjoyable affair. Tom the 
innkeeper put three tables together in the parlor, and 
the seven Weasleys, Harry, and Hermione ate their 
way through five delicious courses. 

“How’re we getting to King’s Cross tomorrow, Dad?” 
asked Fred as they dug into a sumptuous chocolate 
pudding. 

“The Ministry’s providing a couple of cars,” said Mr. 
Weasley. 

Everyone looked up at him. 

“Why?” said Percy curiously. 

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s because of you, Perce,” said George seriously. 
“And there’ll be little flags on the hoods, with HB on 
them — ” 

“ — for Humongous Bighead,” said Fred. 

Everyone except Percy and Mrs. Weasley snorted into 
their pudding. 

“Why are the Ministry providing cars, Father?” Percy 
asked again, in a dignified voice. 

“Well, as we haven’t got one anymore,” said Mr. 
Weasley, “ — and as I work there, they’re doing me a 
favor — ” 

His voice was casual, but Harry couldn’t help noticing 
that Mr. Weasley’s ears had gone red, just like Ron’s 
did when he was under pressure. 

“Good thing, too,” said Mrs. Weasley briskly. “Do you 
realize how much luggage you’ve all got between you? 
A nice sight you’d be on the Muggle Underground. ... 
You are all packed, aren’t you?” 

“Ron hasn’t put all his new things in his trunk yet,” 
said Percy, in a long-suffering voice. “He’s dumped 
them on my bed.” 

“You’d better go and pack properly, Ron, because we 
won’t have much time in the morning,” Mrs. Weasley 
called down the table. Ron scowled at Percy. 

After dinner everyone felt very full and sleepy. One by 
one they made their way upstairs to their rooms to 
check their things for the next day. Ron and Percy 
were next door to Harry. He had just closed and 
locked his own trunk when he heard angry voices 
through the wall, and went to see what was going on. 
Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The door of number twelve was ajar and Percy was 
shouting. 

“It was here, on the bedside table, I took it off for 
polishing — ” 

“I haven’t touched it, all right?” Ron roared back. 
“What’s up?” said Harry. 

“My Head Boy badge is gone,” said Percy, rounding on 
Harry. 

“So’s Scabbers’s rat tonic,” said Ron, throwing things 
out of his trunk to look. “I think I might’ve left it in 
the bar — ” 

“You’re not going anywhere till you’ve found my 
badge!” yelled Percy. 

“I’ll get Scabbers’s stuff, I’m packed,” Harry said to 
Ron, and he went downstairs. 

Harry was halfway along the passage to the bar, 
which was now very dark, when he heard another 
pair of angry voices coming from the parlor. A second 
later, he recognized them as Mr. and Mrs. Weasleys’. 
He hesitated, not wanting them to know he’d heard 
them arguing, when the sound of his own name made 
him stop, then move closer to the parlor door. 

“... makes no sense not to tell him,” Mr. Weasley was 
saying heatedly. “Harry’s got a right to know. I’ve tried 
to tell Fudge, but he insists on treating Harry like a 
child. He’s thirteen years old and — ” 

“Arthur, the truth would terrify him!” said Mrs. 
Weasley shrilly. “Do you really want to send Harry 



Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




back to school with that hanging over him? For 
heaven’s sake, he’s happy not knowing!” 

“I don’t want to make him miserable, I want to put 
him on his guard!” retorted Mr. Weasley. “You know 
what Harry and Ron are like, wandering off by 
themselves — they’ve even ended up in the Forbidden 
Forest! But Harry mustn’t do that this year! When I 
think what could have happened to him that night he 
ran away from home! If the Knight Bus hadn’t picked 
him up, I’m prepared to bet he would have been dead 
before the Ministry found him.” 

“But he’s not dead, he’s fine, so what’s the point — ” 

“Molly, they say Sirius Black’s mad, and maybe he is, 
but he was clever enough to escape from Azkaban, 
and that’s supposed to be impossible. It’s been a 
month, and no one’s seen hide nor hair of him, and I 
don’t care what Fudge keeps telling the Daily Prophet, 
we’re no nearer catching Black than inventing self- 
spelling wands. The only thing we know for sure is 
what Black’s after — ” 

“But Harry will be perfectly safe at Hogwarts.” 

“We thought Azkaban was perfectly safe. If Black can 
break out of Azkaban, he can break into Hogwarts.” 

“But no one’s really sure that Black’s after Harry — ” 

There was a thud on wood, and Harry was sure Mr. 
Weasley had banged his fist on the table. 

“Molly, how many times do I have to tell you? They 
didn’t report it in the press because Fudge wanted it 
kept quiet, but Fudge went out to Azkaban the night 
Black escaped. The guards told Fudge that Black’s 
been talking in his sleep for a while now. Always the 
Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




same words: ‘He’s at Hogwarts ... he’s at Hogwarts.’ 
Black is deranged, Molly, and he wants Harry dead. If 
you ask me, he thinks murdering Harry will bring 
You-Know-Who back to power. Black lost everything 
the night Harry stopped You-Know-Who, and he’s had 
twelve years alone in Azkaban to brood on that. ...” 

There was a silence. Harry leaned still closer to the 
door, desperate to hear more. 

“Well, Arthur, you must do what you think is right. 
But you’re forgetting Albus Dumbledore. I don’t think 
anything could hurt Harry at Hogwarts while 
Dumbledore ’s headmaster. I suppose he knows about 
all this?” 

“Of course he knows. We had to ask him if he minds 
the Azkaban guards stationing themselves around the 
entrances to the school grounds. He wasn’t happy 
about it, but he agreed.” 

“Not happy? Why shouldn’t he be happy, if they’re 
there to catch Black?” 

“Dumbledore isn’t fond of the Azkaban guards,” said 
Mr. Weasley heavily. “Nor am I, if it comes to that ... 
but when you’re dealing with a wizard like Black, you 
sometimes have to join forces with those you’d rather 
avoid.” 

“If they save Harry — ” 

“ — then I will never say another word against them,” 
said Mr. Weasley wearily. “It’s late, Molly, we’d better 
go up. ...” 

Harry heard chairs move. As quietly as he could, he 
hurried down the passage to the bar and out of sight. 
The parlor door opened, and a few seconds later 

Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




footsteps told him that Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were 
climbing the stairs. 



The bottle of rat tonic was lying under the table they 
had sat at earlier. Harry waited until he heard Mr. 
and Mrs. Weasley’s bedroom door close, then headed 
back upstairs with the bottle. 

Fred and George were crouching in the shadows on 
the landing, heaving with laughter as they listened to 
Percy dismantling his and Ron’s room in search of his 
badge. 

“We’ve got it,” Fred whispered to Harry. “We’ve been 
improving it.” 

The badge now read BigheacL Boy. 

Harry forced a laugh, went to give Ron the rat tonic, 
then shut himself in his room and lay down on his 
bed. 

So Sirius Black was after him. This explained 
everything. Fudge had been lenient with him because 
he was so relieved to find him alive. He’d made Harry 
promise to stay in Diagon Alley where there were 
plenty of wizards to keep an eye on him. And he was 
sending two Ministry cars to take them all to the 
station tomorrow, so that the Weasleys could look 
after Harry until he was on the train. 

Harry lay listening to the muffled shouting next door 
and wondered why he didn’t feel more scared. Sirius 
Black had murdered thirteen people with one curse; 
Mr. and Mrs. Weasley obviously thought Harry would 
be panic-stricken if he knew the truth. But Harry 
happened to agree wholeheartedly with Mrs. Weasley 
that the safest place on earth was wherever Albus 
Dumbledore happened to be. Didn’t people always say 
Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




that Dumbledore was the only person Lord Voldemort 
had ever been afraid of? Surely Black, as Voldemort’s 
right-hand man, would be just as frightened of him? 

And then there were these Azkaban guards everyone 
kept talking about. They seemed to scare most people 
senseless, and if they were stationed all around the 
school, Black’s chances of getting inside seemed very 
remote. 

No, all in all, the thing that bothered Harry most was 
the fact that his chances of visiting Hogsmeade now 
looked like zero. Nobody would want Harry to leave 
the safety of the castle until Black was caught; in 
fact, Harry suspected his every move would be 
carefully watched until the danger had passed. 

He scowled at the dark ceiling. Did they think he 
couldn’t look after himself? He’d escaped Lord 
Voldemort three times; he wasn’t completely useless. 



Unbidden, the image of the beast in the shadows of 
Magnolia Crescent crossed his mind. What to do when 
you know the worst is coming. . . . 

“I’m not going to be murdered,” Harry said out loud. 

“That’s the spirit, dear,” said his mirror sleepily. 



Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




5 




THE DEMENTOR 

Tom woke Harry the next morning with his usual 
toothless grin and a cup of tea. Harry got dressed and 
was just persuading a disgruntled Hedwig to get back 
into her cage when Ron banged his way into the 
room, pulling a sweatshirt over his head and looking 
irritable. 

“The sooner we get on the train, the better,” he said. 
“At least I can get away from Percy at Hogwarts. Now 
he’s accusing me of dripping tea on his photo of 
Penelope Clearwater. You know,” Ron grimaced, “his 
girlfriend. She’s hidden her face under the frame 
because her nose has gone all blotchy. ...” 

“I’ve got something to tell you,” Harry began, but they 
were interrupted by Fred and George, who had looked 
in to congratulate Ron on infuriating Percy again. 

They headed down to breakfast, where Mr. Weasley 
was reading the front page of the Daily Prophet with a 
furrowed brow and Mrs. Weasley was telling 

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Hermione and Ginny about a love potion she’d made 
as a young girl. All three of them were rather giggly. 

“What were you saying?” Ron asked Harry as they sat 
down. 

“Later,” Harry muttered as Percy stormed in. 

Harry had no chance to speak to Ron or Hermione in 
the chaos of leaving; they were too busy heaving all 
their trunks down the Leaky Cauldron’s narrow 
staircase and piling them up near the door, with 
Hedwig and Hermes, Percy’s screech owl, perched on 
top in their cages. A small wickerwork basket stood 
beside the heap of trunks, spitting loudly. 

“It’s all right, Crookshanks,” Hermione cooed through 
the wickerwork. “I’ll let you out on the train.” 

“You won’t,” snapped Ron. “What about poor 
Scabbers, eh?” 

He pointed at his chest, where a large lump indicated 
that Scabbers was curled up in his pocket. 

Mr. Weasley, who had been outside waiting for the 
Ministry cars, stuck his head inside. 

“They’re here,” he said. “Harry, come on.” 

Mr. Weasley marched Harry across the short stretch 
of pavement toward the first of two old-fashioned dark 
green cars, each of which was driven by a furtive- 
looking wizard wearing a suit of emerald velvet. 

“In you get, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, glancing up and 
down the crowded street. 



Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry got into the back of the car and was shortly 
joined by Hermione, Ron, and, to Ron’s disgust, 

Percy. 

The journey to King’s Cross was very uneventful 
compared with Harry’s trip on the Knight Bus. The 
Ministry of Magic cars seemed almost ordinary, 
though Harry noticed that they could slide through 
gaps that Uncle Vernon’s new company car certainly 
couldn’t have managed. They reached King’s Cross 
with twenty minutes to spare; the Ministry drivers 
found them trolleys, unloaded their trunks, touched 
their hats in salute to Mr. Weasley, and drove away, 
somehow managing to jump to the head of an 
unmoving line at the traffic lights. 

Mr. Weasley kept close to Harry’s elbow all the way 
into the station. 

“Right then,” he said, glancing around them. “Let’s do 
this in pairs, as there are so many of us. I’ll go 
through first with Harry.” 

Mr. Weasley strolled toward the barrier between 
platforms nine and ten, pushing Harry’s trolley and 
apparently very interested in the Intercity 125 that 
had just arrived at platform nine. With a meaningful 
look at Harry, he leaned casually against the barrier. 
Harry imitated him. 

In a moment, they had fallen sideways through the 
solid metal onto platform nine and three-quarters and 
looked up to see the Hogwarts Express, a scarlet 
steam engine, puffing smoke over a platform packed 
with witches and wizards seeing their children onto 
the train. 



Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Percy and Ginny suddenly appeared behind Harry. 
They were panting and had apparently taken the 
barrier at a run. 

“Ah, there’s Penelope!” said Percy, smoothing his hair 
and going pink again. Ginny caught Harry’s eye, and 
they both turned away to hide their laughter as Percy 
strode over to a girl with long, curly hair, walking with 
his chest thrown out so that she couldn’t miss his 
shiny badge. 

Once the remaining Weasleys and Hermione had 
joined them, Harry and Ron led the way to the end of 
the train, past packed compartments, to a carriage 
that looked quite empty. They loaded the trunks onto 
it, stowed Hedwig and Crookshanks in the luggage 
rack, then went back outside to say good-bye to Mr. 
and Mrs. Weasley. 

Mrs. Weasley kissed all her children, then Hermione, 
and finally, Harry. He was embarrassed, but really 
quite pleased, when she gave him an extra hug. 

“Do take care, won’t you, Harry?” she said as she 
straightened up, her eyes oddly bright. Then she 
opened her enormous handbag and said, “I’ve made 
you all sandwiches. ... Here you are, Ron ... no, 
they’re not corned beef. ... Fred? Where’s Fred? Here 
you are, dear. ...” 

“Harry,” said Mr. Weasley quietly, “come over here a 
moment.” 

He jerked his head toward a pillar, and Harry followed 
him behind it, leaving the others crowded around 
Mrs. Weasley. 

“There’s something I’ve got to tell you before you leave 
— ” said Mr. Weasley, in a tense voice. 

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s all right, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry. “I already 
know.” 

“You know? How could you know?” 

“I — er — I heard you and Mrs. Weasley talking last 
night. I couldn’t help hearing,” Harry added quickly. 
“Sorry — ” 

“That’s not the way I’d have chosen for you to find 
out,” said Mr. Weasley, looking anxious. 

“No — honestly, it’s okay. This way, you haven’t 
broken your word to Fudge and I know what’s going 
on.” 

“Harry, you must be very scared — ” 

“I’m not,” said Harry sincerely. “Really” he added, 
because Mr. Weasley was looking disbelieving. “I’m 
not trying to be a hero, but seriously, Sirius Black 
can’t be worse than Voldemort, can he?” 

Mr. Weasley flinched at the sound of the name but 
overlooked it. 

“Harry, I knew you were, well, made of stronger stuff 
than Fudge seems to think, and I’m obviously pleased 
that you’re not scared, but — ” 

“Arthur!” called Mrs. Weasley, who was now 
shepherding the rest onto the train. “Arthur, what are 
you doing? It’s about to go!” 

“He’s coming, Molly!” said Mr. Weasley but he turned 
back to Harry and kept talking in a lower and more 
hurried voice. “Listen, I want you to give me your 
word — ” 



Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — that I’ll be a good boy and stay in the castle?” said 
Harry gloomily. 

“Not entirely,” said Mr. Weasley, who looked more 
serious than Harry had ever seen him. “Harry, swear 
to me you won’t go looking for Black.” 

Harry stared. “What?” 

There was a loud whistle. Guards were walking along 
the train, slamming all the doors shut. 

“Promise me, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, talking more 
quickly still, “that whatever happens — ” 

“Why would I go looking for someone I know wants to 
kill me?” said Harry blankly. 

“Swear to me that whatever you might hear — ” 

“Arthur, quickly!” cried Mrs. Weasley. 

Steam was billowing from the train; it had started to 
move. Harry ran to the compartment door and Ron 
threw it open and stood back to let him on. They 
leaned out of the window and waved at Mr. and Mrs. 
Weasley until the train turned a corner and blocked 
them from view. 

“I need to talk to you in private,” Harry muttered to 
Ron and Hermione as the train picked up speed. 

“Go away, Ginny,” said Ron. 

“Oh, that’s nice,” said Ginny huffily, and she stalked 
off. 



Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off down the corridor, 
looking for an empty compartment, but all were full 
except for the one at the very end of the train. 

This had only one occupant, a man sitting fast asleep 
next to the window. Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
checked on the threshold. The Hogwarts Express was 
usually reserved for students and they had never seen 
an adult there before, except for the witch who 
pushed the food cart. 

The stranger was wearing an extremely shabby set of 
wizard’s robes that had been darned in several places. 
He looked ill and exhausted. Though quite young, his 
light brown hair was flecked with gray. 

“Who d’you reckon he is?” Ron hissed as they sat 
down and slid the door shut, taking the seats farthest 
away from the window. 

“Professor R. J. Lupin,” whispered Hermione at once. 
“How d’you know that?” 

“It’s on his case,” she replied, pointing at the luggage 
rack over the man’s head, where there was a small, 
battered case held together with a large quantity of 
neatly knotted string. The name Professor R. J. Lupin 
was stamped across one corner in peeling letters. 

“Wonder what he teaches?” said Ron, frowning at 
Professor Lupin’s pallid profile. 

“That’s obvious,” whispered Hermione. “There’s only 
one vacancy, isn’t there? Defense Against the Dark 
Arts.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione had already had two 
Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers, both of 

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




whom had lasted only one year. There were rumors 
that the job was jinxed. 

“Well, I hope he’s up to it,” said Ron doubtfully. “He 
looks like one good hex would finish him off, doesn’t 
he? Anyway ...” He turned to Harry. “What were you 
going to tell us?” 

Harry explained all about Mr. and Mrs. Weasley’s 
argument and the warning Mr. Weasley had just 
given him. When he’d finished, Ron looked 
thunderstruck, and Hermione had her hands over her 
mouth. She finally lowered them to say, “Sirius Black 
escaped to come after you? Oh, Harry ... you’ll have to 
be really, really careful. Don’t go looking for trouble, 
Harry — ” 

“I don’t go looking for trouble,” said Harry, nettled. 
“Trouble usually finds me.” 

“How thick would Harry have to be, to go looking for a 
nutter who wants to kill him?” said Ron shakily. 

They were taking the news worse than Harry had 
expected. Both Ron and Hermione seemed to be much 
more frightened of Black than he was. 

“No one knows how he got out of Azkaban,” said Ron 
uncomfortably. “No one’s ever done it before. And he 
was a top-security prisoner too.” 

“But they’ll catch him, won’t they?” said Hermione 
earnestly. “I mean, they’ve got all the Muggles looking 
out for him too. ...” 

“What’s that noise?” said Ron suddenly. 

A faint, tinny sort of whistle was coming from 
somewhere. They looked all around the compartment. 

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s coming from your trunk, Harry,” said Ron, 
standing up and reaching into the luggage rack. A 
moment later he had pulled the Pocket Sneakoscope 
out from between Harry’s robes. It was spinning very 
fast in the palm of Ron’s hand and glowing brilliantly. 

“Is that a Sneakoscope?” said Hermione interestedly, 
standing up for a better look. 

“Yeah ... mind you, it’s a very cheap one,” Ron said. 

“It went haywire just as I was tying it to Errol’s leg to 
send it to Harry.” 

“Were you doing anything untrustworthy at the time?” 
said Hermione shrewdly. 

“No! Well ... I wasn’t supposed to be using Errol. You 
know he’s not really up to long journeys ... but how 
else was I supposed to get Harry’s present to him?” 

“Stick it back in the trunk,” Harry advised as the 
Sneakoscope whistled piercingly, “or it’ll wake him 
up.” 

He nodded toward Professor Lupin. Ron stuffed the 
Sneakoscope into a particularly horrible pair of Uncle 
Vernon’s old socks, which deadened the sound, then 
closed the lid of the trunk on it. 

“We could get it checked in Hogsmeade,” said Ron, 
sitting back down. “They sell that sort of thing in 
Dervish and Banges, magical instruments and stuff. 
Fred and George told me.” 

“Do you know much about Hogsmeade?” asked 
Hermione keenly. “I’ve read it’s the only entirely non- 
Muggle settlement in Britain — ” 



Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, I think it is,” said Ron in an offhand sort of 
way, “but that’s not why I want to go. I just want to 
get inside Honeydukes!” 

“What’s that?” said Hermione. 

“It’s this sweetshop,” said Ron, a dreamy look coming 
over his face, “where they’ve got everything. ... Pepper 
Imps — they make you smoke at the mouth — and 
great fat Chocoballs full of strawberry mousse and 
clotted cream, and really excellent sugar quills, which 
you can suck in class and just look like you’re 
thinking what to write next — ” 

“But Hogsmeade’s a very interesting place, isn’t it?” 
Hermione pressed on eagerly. “In Sites of Historical 
Sorcery it says the inn was the headquarters for the 
1612 goblin rebellion, and the Shrieking Shack’s 
supposed to be the most severely haunted building in 
Britain — ” 

“ — and massive sherbet balls that make you levitate a 
few inches off the ground while you’re sucking them,” 
said Ron, who was plainly not listening to a word 
Hermione was saying. 

Hermione looked around at Harry. 

“Won’t it be nice to get out of school for a bit and 
explore Hogsmeade?” 

“ ’Spect it will,” said Harry heavily. “You’ll have to tell 
me when you’ve found out.” 

“What d’you mean?” said Ron. 

“I can’t go. The Dursleys didn’t sign my permission 
form, and Fudge wouldn’t either.” 



Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron looked horrified. 



“You’re not allowed to come? But — no way — 
McGonagall or someone will give you permission — ” 

Harry gave a hollow laugh. Professor McGonagall, 
head of Gryffindor House, was very strict. 

“ — or we can ask Fred and George, they know every 
secret passage out of the castle — ” 

“Ron!” said Hermione sharply. “I don’t think Harry 
should be sneaking out of school with Black on the 
loose — ” 

“Yeah, I expect that’s what McGonagall will say when 
I ask for permission,” said Harry bitterly. 

“But if we’re with him,” said Ron spiritedly to 
Hermione, “Black wouldn’t dare — ” 

“Oh, Ron, don’t talk rubbish,” snapped Hermione. 
“Black’s already murdered a whole bunch of people in 
the middle of a crowded street. Do you really think 
he’s going to worry about attacking Harry just 
because we’re there?” 

She was fumbling with the straps of Crookshanks’s 
basket as she spoke. 

“Don’t let that thing out!” Ron said, but too late; 
Crookshanks leapt lightly from the basket, stretched, 
yawned, and sprang onto Ron’s knees; the lump in 
Ron’s pocket trembled and he shoved Crookshanks 
angrily away. 

“Get out of here!” 

“Ron, don’t!” said Hermione angrily. 

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron was about to answer back when Professor Lupin 
stirred. They watched him apprehensively, but he 
simply turned his head the other way, mouth slightly 
open, and slept on. 

The Hogwarts Express moved steadily north and the 
scenery outside the window became wilder and darker 
while the clouds overhead thickened. People were 
chasing backward and forward past the door of their 
compartment. Crookshanks had now settled in an 
empty seat, his squashed face turned toward Ron, his 
yellow eyes on Ron’s top pocket. 

At one o’clock, the plump witch with the food cart 
arrived at the compartment door. 

“D’you think we should wake him up?” Ron asked 
awkwardly, nodding toward Professor Lupin. “He 
looks like he could do with some food.” 

Hermione approached Professor Lupin cautiously. 

“Er — Professor?” she said. “Excuse me — Professor?” 

He didn’t move. 

“Don’t worry, dear,” said the witch as she handed 
Harry a large stack of Cauldron Cakes. “If he’s hungry 
when he wakes, I’ll be up front with the driver.” 

“I suppose he is asleep?” said Ron quietly as the witch 
slid the compartment door closed. “I mean — he 
hasn’t died, has he?” 

“No, no, he’s breathing,” whispered Hermione, taking 
the Cauldron Cake Harry passed her. 

He might not be very good company, but Professor 
Lupin’s presence in their compartment had its uses. 

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Midafternoon, just as it had started to rain, blurring 
the rolling hills outside the window, they heard 
footsteps in the corridor again, and their three least 
favorite people appeared at the door: Draco Malfoy, 
flanked by his cronies, Vincent Crabbe and Gregory 
Goyle. 

Draco Malfoy and Harry had been enemies ever since 
they had met on their very first train journey to 
Hogwarts. Malfoy, who had a pale, pointed, sneering 
face, was in Slytherin House; he played Seeker on the 
Slytherin Quidditch team, the same position that 
Harry played on the Gryffindor team. Crabbe and 
Goyle seemed to exist to do Malfoy’s bidding. They 
were both wide and musclely; Crabbe was taller, with 
a pudding-bowl haircut and a very thick neck; Goyle 
had short, bristly hair and long, gorilla-ish arms. 

“Well, look who it is,” said Malfoy in his usual lazy 
drawl, pulling open the compartment door. “Potty and 
the Weasel.” 

Crabbe and Goyle chuckled trollishly. 

“I heard your father finally got his hands on some 
gold this summer, Weasley,” said Malfoy. “Did your 
mother die of shock?” 

Ron stood up so quickly he knocked Crookshanks’s 
basket to the floor. Professor Lupin gave a snort. 

“Who’s that?” said Malfoy, taking an automatic step 
backward as he spotted Lupin. 

“New teacher,” said Harry, who got to his feet, too, in 
case he needed to hold Ron back. “What were you 
saying, Malfoy?” 



Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy’s pale eyes narrowed; he wasn’t fool enough to 
pick a fight right under a teacher’s nose. 

“C’mon,” he muttered resentfully to Crabbe and 
Goyle, and they disappeared. 

Harry and Ron sat down again, Ron massaging his 
knuckles. 

“I’m not going to take any crap from Malfoy this year,” 
he said angrily. “I mean it. If he makes one more 
crack about my family, I’m going to get hold of his 
head and — ” 

Ron made a violent gesture in midair. 

“Ron,” hissed Hermione, pointing at Professor Lupin, 
“be careful ...” 

But Professor Lupin was still fast asleep. 

The rain thickened as the train sped yet farther north; 
the windows were now a solid, shimmering gray, 
which gradually darkened until lanterns flickered into 
life all along the corridors and over the luggage racks. 
The train rattled, the rain hammered, the wind 
roared, but still, Professor Lupin slept. 

“We must be nearly there,” said Ron, leaning forward 
to look past Professor Lupin at the now completely 
black window. 

The words had hardly left him when the train started 
to slow down. 

“Great,” said Ron, getting up and walking carefully 
past Professor Lupin to try and see outside. “I’m 
starving. I want to get to the feast. ...” 



Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“We can’t be there yet,” said Hermione, checking her 
watch. 

“So why’re we stopping?” 

The train was getting slower and slower. As the noise 
of the pistons fell away, the wind and rain sounded 
louder than ever against the windows. 

Harry, who was nearest the door, got up to look into 
the corridor. All along the carriage, heads were 
sticking curiously out of their compartments. 

The train came to a stop with a jolt, and distant thuds 
and bangs told them that luggage had fallen out of 
the racks. Then, without warning, all the lamps went 
out and they were plunged into total darkness. 

“What’s going on?” said Ron’s voice from behind 
Harry. 

“Ouch!” gasped Hermione. “Ron, that was my foot!” 
Harry felt his way back to his seat. 

“D’you think we’ve broken down?” 

“Dunno ...” 

There was a squeaking sound, and Harry saw the dim 
black outline of Ron, wiping a patch clean on the 
window and peering out. 

“There’s something moving out there,” Ron said. “I 
think people are coming aboard. ...” 

The compartment door suddenly opened and someone 
fell painfully over Harry’s legs. 



Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sorry — d’you know what’s going on? — Ouch — 
sorry — ” 

“Hullo, Neville,” said Harry, feeling around in the dark 
and pulling Neville up by his cloak. 

“Harry? Is that you? What’s happening?” 

“No idea — sit down — ” 

There was a loud hissing and a yelp of pain; Neville 
had tried to sit on Crookshanks. 

“I’m going to go and ask the driver what’s going on,” 
came Hermione’s voice. Harry felt her pass him, heard 
the door slide open again, and then a thud and two 
loud squeals of pain. 

“Who’s that?” 

“Who’s that?” 

“Ginny?” 

“Hermione?” 

“What are you doing?” 

“I was looking for Ron — ” 

“Come in and sit down — ” 

“Not here!” said Harry hurriedly. “I’m here!” 

“Ouch!” said Neville. 

“Quiet!” said a hoarse voice suddenly. 



Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Professor Lupin appeared to have woken up at last. 
Harry could hear movements in his corner. None of 
them spoke. 

There was a soft, crackling noise, and a shivering 
light filled the compartment. Professor Lupin 
appeared to be holding a handful of flames. They 
illuminated his tired, gray face, but his eyes looked 
alert and wary. 

“Stay where you are,” he said in the same hoarse 
voice, and he got slowly to his feet with his handful of 
fire held out in front of him. 

But the door slid slowly open before Lupin could 
reach it. 

Standing in the doorway, illuminated by the shivering 
flames in Lupin’s hand, was a cloaked figure that 
towered to the ceiling. Its face was completely hidden 
beneath its hood. Harry’s eyes darted downward, and 
what he saw made his stomach contract. There was a 
hand protruding from the cloak and it was glistening, 
grayish, slimy-looking, and scabbed, like something 
dead that had decayed in water. . . . 

But it was visible only for a split second. As though 
the creature beneath the cloak sensed Harry’s gaze, 
the hand was suddenly withdrawn into the folds of its 
black cloak. 

And then the thing beneath the hood, whatever it 
was, drew a long, slow, rattling breath, as though it 
were trying to suck something more than air from its 
surroundings. 

An intense cold swept over them all. Harry felt his 
own breath catch in his chest. The cold went deeper 



Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




than his skin. It was inside his chest, it was inside 
his very heart. ... 



Harry’s eyes rolled up into his head. He couldn’t see. 
He was drowning in cold. There was a rushing in his 
ears as though of water. He was being dragged 
downward, the roaring growing louder . . . 

And then, from far away, he heard screaming, 
terrible, terrified, pleading screams. He wanted to 
help whoever it was, he tried to move his arms, but 
couldn’t ... a thick white fog was swirling around him, 
inside him — 

“Harry! Harry! Are you all right?” 

Someone was slapping his face. 

“W — what?” 

Harry opened his eyes; there were lanterns above 
him, and the floor was shaking — the Hogwarts 
Express was moving again and the lights had come 
back on. He seemed to have slid out of his seat onto 
the floor. Ron and Hermione were kneeling next to 
him, and above them he could see Neville and 
Professor Lupin watching. Harry felt very sick; when 
he put up his hand to push his glasses back on, he 
felt cold sweat on his face. 

Ron and Hermione heaved him back onto his seat. 

“Are you okay?” Ron asked nervously. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, looking quickly toward the door. 
The hooded creature had vanished. “What happened? 
Where’s that — that thing? Who screamed?” 

“No one screamed,” said Ron, more nervously still. 

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry looked around the bright compartment. Ginny 
and Neville looked back at him, both very pale. 

“But I heard screaming — ” 

A loud snap made them all jump. Professor Lupin was 
breaking an enormous slab of chocolate into pieces. 

“Here,” he said to Harry, handing him a particularly 
large piece. “Eat it. It’ll help.” 

Harry took the chocolate but didn’t eat it. 

“What was that thing?” he asked Lupin. 

“A dementor,” said Lupin, who was now giving 
chocolate to everyone else. “One of the dementors of 
Azkaban.” 

Everyone stared at him. Professor Lupin crumpled up 
the empty chocolate wrapper and put it in his pocket. 

“Eat,” he repeated. “It’ll help. I need to speak to the 
driver, excuse me ...” 

He strolled past Harry and disappeared into the 
corridor. 

“Are you sure you’re okay, Harry?” said Hermione, 
watching Harry anxiously. 

“I don’t get it. ... What happened?” said Harry, wiping 
more sweat off his face. 

“Well — that thing — the dementor — stood there and 
looked around (I mean, I think it did, I couldn’t see its 
face) — and you — you — ” 



Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought you were having a fit or something,” said 
Ron, who still looked scared. “You went sort of rigid 
and fell out of your seat and started twitching — ” 

“And Professor Lupin stepped over you, and walked 
toward the dementor, and pulled out his wand,” said 
Hermione, “and he said, ‘None of us is hiding Sirius 
Black under our cloaks. Go.’ But the dementor didn’t 
move, so Lupin muttered something, and a silvery 
thing shot out of his wand at it, and it turned around 
and sort of glided away. ...” 

“It was horrible,” said Neville, in a higher voice than 
usual. “Did you feel how cold it got when it came in?” 

“I felt weird,” said Ron, shifting his shoulders 
uncomfortably. “Like I’d never be cheerful again. ...” 

Ginny, who was huddled in her corner looking nearly 
as bad as Harry felt, gave a small sob; Hermione went 
over and put a comforting arm around her. 

“But didn’t any of you — fall off your seats?” said 
Harry awkwardly. 

“No,” said Ron, looking anxiously at Harry again. 
“Ginny was shaking like mad, though. ...” 

Harry didn’t understand. He felt weak and shivery, as 
though he were recovering from a bad bout of flu; he 
also felt the beginnings of shame. Why had he gone to 
pieces like that, when no one else had? 

Professor Lupin had come back. He paused as he 
entered, looked around, and said, with a small smile, 
“I haven’t poisoned that chocolate, you know. ...” 



Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry took a bite and to his great surprise felt 
warmth spread suddenly to the tips of his fingers and 
toes. 

“Well be at Hogwarts in ten minutes,” said Professor 
Lupin. “Are you all right, Harry?” 

Harry didn’t ask how Professor Lupin knew his name. 

“Fine,” he muttered, embarrassed. 

They didn’t talk much during the remainder of the 
journey. At long last, the train stopped at Hogsmeade 
station, and there was a great scramble to get 
outside; owls hooted, cats meowed, and Neville’s pet 
toad croaked loudly from under his hat. It was 
freezing on the tiny platform; rain was driving down 
in icy sheets. 

“Firs’ years this way!” called a familiar voice. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione turned and saw the gigantic 
outline of Hagrid at the other end of the platform, 
beckoning the terrified-looking new students forward 
for their traditional journey across the lake. 

“All righ’, you three?” Hagrid yelled over the heads of 
the crowd. They waved at him, but had no chance to 
speak to him because the mass of people around 
them was shunting them away along the platform. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed the rest of the 
school along the platform and out onto a rough mud 
track, where at least a hundred stagecoaches awaited 
the remaining students, each pulled, Harry could only 
assume, by an invisible horse, because when they 
climbed inside and shut the door, the coach set off all 
by itself, bumping and swaying in procession. 

The coach smelled faintly of mold and straw. Harry 
felt better since the chocolate, but still weak. Ron and 

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione kept looking at him sideways, as though 
frightened he might collapse again. 

As the carriage trundled toward a pair of magnificent 
wrought iron gates, flanked with stone columns 
topped with winged boars, Harry saw two more 
towering, hooded dementors, standing guard on 
either side. A wave of cold sickness threatened to 
engulf him again; he leaned back into the lumpy seat 
and closed his eyes until they had passed the gates. 
The carriage picked up speed on the long, sloping 
drive up to the castle; Hermione was leaning out of 
the tiny window, watching the many turrets and 
towers draw nearer. At last, the carriage swayed to a 
halt, and Hermione and Ron got out. 

As Harry stepped down, a drawling, delighted voice 
sounded in his ear. 

“You fainted, Potter? Is Longbottom telling the truth? 
You actually fainted?” 

Malfoy elbowed past Hermione to block Harry’s way 
up the stone steps to the castle, his face gleeful and 
his pale eyes glinting maliciously. 

“Shove off, Malfoy,” said Ron, whose jaw was 
clenched. 

“Did you faint as well, Weasley?” said Malfoy loudly. 
“Did the scary old dementor frighten you too, 
Weasley?” 

“Is there a problem?” said a mild voice. Professor 
Lupin had just gotten out of the next carriage. 

Malfoy gave Professor Lupin an insolent stare, which 
took in the patches on his robes and the delapidated 
suitcase. With a tiny hint of sarcasm in his voice, he 

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




said, “Oh, no — er — Professor,” then he smirked at 
Crabbe and Goyle and led them up the steps into the 
castle. 

Hermione prodded Ron in the back to make him 
hurry, and the three of them joined the crowd 
swarming up the steps, through the giant oak front 
doors, into the cavernous entrance hall, which was lit 
with flaming torches, and housed a magnificent 
marble staircase that led to the upper floors. 

The door into the Great Hall stood open at the right; 
Harry followed the crowd toward it, but had barely 
glimpsed the enchanted ceiling, which was black and 
cloudy tonight, when a voice called, “Potter! Granger! 

I want to see you both!” 

Harry and Hermione turned around, surprised. 
Professor McGonagall, Transfiguration teacher and 
head of Gryffindor House, was calling over the heads 
of the crowd. She was a stern-looking witch who wore 
her hair in a tight bun; her sharp eyes were framed 
with square spectacles. Harry fought his way over to 
her with a feeling of foreboding: Professor McGonagall 
had a way of making him feel he must have done 
something wrong. 

“There’s no need to look so worried — I just want a 
word in my office,” she told them. “Move along there, 
Weasley.” 

Ron stared as Professor McGonagall ushered 
Harry and Hermione away from the chattering crowd; 
they accompanied her across the entrance hall, up 
the marble staircase, and along a corridor. 

Once they were in her office, a small room with a 
large, welcoming fire, Professor McGonagall motioned 
Harry and Hermione to sit down. She settled herself 

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




behind her desk and said abruptly, “Professor Lupin 
sent an owl ahead to say that you were taken ill on 
the train, Potter.” 

Before Harry could reply, there was a soft knock on 
the door and Madam Pomfrey, the nurse, came 
bustling in. 

Harry felt himself going red in the face. It was bad 
enough that he’d passed out, or whatever he had 
done, without everyone making all this fuss. 

“I’m fine,” he said, “I don’t need anything — ” 

“Oh, it’s you, is it?” said Madam Pomfrey, ignoring 
this and bending down to stare closely at him. “I 
suppose you’ve been doing something dangerous 
again?” 

“It was a dementor, Poppy,” said Professor 
McGonagall. 

They exchanged a dark look, and Madam Pomfrey 
clucked disapprovingly. 

“Setting dementors around a school,” she muttered, 
pushing back Harry’s hair and feeling his forehead. 
“He won’t be the last one who collapses. Yes, he’s all 
clammy. Terrible things, they are, and the effect they 
have on people who are already delicate — ” 

“I’m not delicate!” said Harry crossly. 

“Of course you’re not,” said Madam Pomfrey 
absentmindedly, now taking his pulse. 

“What does he need?” said Professor McGonagall 
crisply. “Bed rest? Should he perhaps spend tonight 
in the hospital wing?” 

Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm /ine!” said Harry, jumping up. The thought of 
what Draco Malfoy would say if he had to go to the 
hospital wing was torture. 

“Well, he should have some chocolate, at the very 
least,” said Madam Pomfrey, who was now trying to 
peer into Harry’s eyes. 

“I’ve already had some,” said Harry. “Professor Lupin 
gave me some. He gave it to all of us.” 

“Did he, now?” said Madam Pomfrey approvingly. “So 
we’ve finally got a Defense Against the Dark Arts 
teacher who knows his remedies?” 

“Are you sure you feel all right, Potter?” Professor 
McGonagall said sharply. 

“Yes,” said Harry. 

“Very well. Kindly wait outside while I have a quick 
word with Miss Granger about her course schedule, 
then we can go down to the feast together.” 

Harry went back into the corridor with Madam 
Pomfrey, who left for the hospital wing, muttering to 
herself. He had to wait only a few minutes; then 
Hermione emerged looking very happy about 
something, followed by Professor McGonagall, and the 
three of them made their way back down the marble 
staircase to the Great Hall. 

It was a sea of pointed black hats; each of the long 
House tables was lined with students, their faces 
glimmering by the light of thousands of candles, 
which were floating over the tables in midair. 

Professor Flitwick, who was a tiny little wizard with a 
shock of white hair, was carrying an ancient hat and 
a three-legged stool out of the hall. 

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh,” said Hermione softly, “we’ve missed the 
Sorting!” 

New students at Hogwarts were sorted into Houses by 
trying on the Sorting Hat, which shouted out the 
House they were best suited to (Gryffindor, 

Ravenclaw, Hufflepuff, or Slytherin). Professor 
McGonagall strode off toward her empty seat at the 
staff table, and Harry and Hermione set off in the 
other direction, as quietly as possible, toward the 
Gryffindor table. People looked around at them as 
they passed along the back of the hall, and a few of 
them pointed at Harry. Had the story of his collapsing 
in front of the dementor traveled that fast? 

He and Hermione sat down on either side of Ron, who 
had saved them seats. 

“What was all that about?” he muttered to Harry. 

Harry started to explain in a whisper, but at that 
moment the headmaster stood up to speak, and he 
broke off. 

Professor Dumbledore, though very old, always gave 
an impression of great energy. He had several feet of 
long silver hair and beard, half-moon spectacles, and 
an extremely crooked nose. He was often described as 
the greatest wizard of the age, but that wasn’t why 
Harry respected him. You couldn’t help trusting Albus 
Dumbledore, and as Harry watched him beaming 
around at the students, he felt really calm for the first 
time since the dementor had entered the train 
compartment. 

“Welcome!” said Dumbledore, the candlelight 
shimmering on his beard. “Welcome to another year 
at Hogwarts! I have a few things to say to you all, and 
as one of them is very serious, I think it best to get it 

Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




out of the way before you become befuddled by our 
excellent feast. ...” 

Dumbledore cleared his throat and continued, “As 
you will all be aware after their search of the 
Hogwarts Express, our school is presently playing 
host to some of the dementors of Azkaban, who are 
here on Ministry of Magic business.” 

He paused, and Harry remembered what Mr. Weasley 
had said about Dumbledore not being happy with the 
dementors guarding the school. 

“They are stationed at every entrance to the grounds,” 
Dumbledore continued, “and while they are with us, I 
must make it plain that nobody is to leave school 
without permission. Dementors are not to be fooled 
by tricks or disguises — or even Invisibility Cloaks,” 
he added blandly, and Harry and Ron glanced at each 
other. “It is not in the nature of a dementor to 
understand pleading or excuses. I therefore warn 
each and every one of you to give them no reason to 
harm you. I look to the prefects, and our new Head 
Boy and Girl, to make sure that no student runs afoul 
of the dementors,” he said. 

Percy, who was sitting a few seats down from Harry, 
puffed out his chest again and stared around 
impressively. Dumbledore paused again; he looked 
very seriously around the hall, and nobody moved or 
made a sound. 

“On a happier note,” he continued, “I am pleased to 
welcome two new teachers to our ranks this year. 

“First, Professor Lupin, who has kindly consented to 
fill the post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher.” 



Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was some scattered, rather unenthusiastic 
applause. Only those who had been in the 
compartment on the train with Professor Lupin 
clapped hard, Harry among them. Professor Lupin 
looked particularly shabby next to all the other 
teachers in their best robes. 

“Look at Snape!” Ron hissed in Harry’s ear. 

Professor Snape, the Potions master, was staring 
along the staff table at Professor Lupin. It was 
common knowledge that Snape wanted the Defense 
Against the Dark Arts job, but even Harry, who hated 
Snape, was startled at the expression twisting his 
thin, sallow face. It was beyond anger: it was loathing. 
Harry knew that expression only too well; it was the 
look Snape wore every time he set eyes on Harry. 

“As to our second new appointment,” Dumbledore 
continued as the lukewarm applause for Professor 
Lupin died away. “Well, I am sorry to tell you that 
Professor Kettleburn, our Care of Magical Creatures 
teacher, retired at the end of last year in order to 
enjoy more time with his remaining limbs. However, I 
am delighted to say that his place will be filled by 
none other than Rubeus Hagrid, who has agreed to 
take on this teaching job in addition to his 
gamekeeping duties.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione stared at one another, 
stunned. Then they joined in with the applause, 
which was tumultuous at the Gryffindor table in 
particular. Harry leaned forward to see Hagrid, who 
was ruby-red in the face and staring down at his 
enormous hands, his wide grin hidden in the tangle of 
his black beard. 



Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“We should’ve known!” Ron roared, pounding the 
table. “Who else would have assigned us a biting 
book?” 



Harry, Ron, and Hermione were the last to stop 
clapping, and as Professor Dumbledore started 
speaking again, they saw that Hagrid was wiping his 
eyes on the tablecloth. 

“Well, I think that’s everything of importance,” said 
Dumbledore. “Let the feast begin!” 

The golden plates and goblets before them filled 
suddenly with food and drink. Harry, suddenly 
ravenous, helped himself to everything he could reach 
and began to eat. 

It was a delicious feast; the hall echoed with talk, 
laughter, and the clatter of knives and forks. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione, however, were eager for it to 
finish so that they could talk to Hagrid. They knew 
how much being made a teacher would mean to him. 
Hagrid wasn’t a fully qualified wizard; he had been 
expelled from Hogwarts in his third year for a crime 
he had not committed. It had been Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione who had cleared Hagrid ’s name last year. 

At long last, when the last morsels of pumpkin tart 
had melted from the golden platters, Dumbledore 
gave the word that it was time for them all to go to 
bed, and they got their chance. 

“Congratulations, Hagrid!” Hermione squealed as they 
reached the teachers’ table. 

“All down ter you three,” said Hagrid, wiping his 
shining face on his napkin as he looked up at them. 
“Can’ believe it ... great man, Dumbledore ... came 
straight down to me hut after Professor Kettleburn 

Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




said he’d had enough. ... It’s what I always wanted. 



Overcome with emotion, he buried his face in his 
napkin, and Professor McGonagall shooed them away. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione joined the Gryffindors 
streaming up the marble staircase and, very tired 
now, along more corridors, up more and more stairs, 
to the hidden entrance to Gryffindor Tower. A large 
portrait of a fat lady in a pink dress asked them, 
“Password?” 

“Coming through, coming through!” Percy called from 
behind the crowd. “The new password’s ‘Fortuna 
Major’!” 

“Oh no,” said Neville Longbottom sadly. He always 
had trouble remembering the passwords. 

Through the portrait hole and across the common 
room, the girls and boys divided toward their separate 
staircases. Harry climbed the spiral stair with no 
thought in his head except how glad he was to be 
back. They reached their familiar, circular dormitory 
with its five four-poster beds, and Harry, looking 
around, felt he was home at last. 



Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 







TALONS AND TEA LEAVES 

When Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the Great 
Hall for breakfast the next day, the first thing they 
saw was Draco Malfoy, who seemed to be entertaining 
a large group of Slytherins with a very funny story. As 
they passed, Malfoy did a ridiculous impression of a 
swooning fit and there was a roar of laughter. 

“Ignore him,” said Hermione, who was right behind 
Harry. “Just ignore him, it’s not worth it. ...” 

“Hey, Potter!” shrieked Pansy Parkinson, a Slytherin 
girl with a face like a pug. “Potter! The dementors are 
coming, Potter! Woooooooo!” 

Harry dropped into a seat at the Gryffindor table, next 
to George Weasley. 

“New third-year course schedules,” said George, 
passing them over. “What’s up with you, Harry?” 

“Malfoy,” said Ron, sitting down on George’s other 
side and glaring over at the Slytherin table. 

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



George looked up in time to see Malfoy pretending to 
faint with terror again. 

“That little git,” he said calmly. “He wasn’t so cocky 
last night when the dementors were down at our end 
of the train. Came running into our compartment, 
didn’t he, Fred?” 

“Nearly wet himself,” said Fred, with a contemptuous 
glance at Malfoy. 

“I wasn’t too happy myself,” said George. “They’re 
horrible things, those dementors. ...” 

“Sort of freeze your insides, don’t they?” said Fred. 

“You didn’t pass out, though, did you?” said Harry in 
a low voice. 

“Forget it, Harry,” said George bracingly. “Dad had to 
go out to Azkaban one time, remember, Fred? And he 
said it was the worst place he’d ever been, he came 
back all weak and shaking. . . . They suck the 
happiness out of a place, dementors. Most of the 
prisoners go mad in there.” 

“Anyway, we’ll see how happy Malfoy looks after our 
first Quidditch match,” said Fred. “Gryffindor versus 
Slytherin, first game of the season, remember?” 

The only time Harry and Malfoy had faced each other 
in a Quidditch match, Malfoy had definitely come off 
worse. Feeling slightly more cheerful, Harry helped 
himself to sausages and fried tomatoes. 

Hermione was examining her new schedule. 

“Ooh, good, we’re starting some new subjects today,” 
she said happily. 

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Hermione,” said Ron, frowning as he looked over her 
shoulder, “they’ve messed up your schedule. Look — 
they’ve got you down for about ten subjects a day. 
There isn’t enough time.” 

“I’ll manage. I’ve fixed it all with Professor 
McGonagall.” 

“But look,” said Ron, laughing, “see this morning? 
Nine o’clock, Divination. And underneath, nine 
o’clock, Muggle Studies. And” — Ron leaned closer to 
the schedule, disbelieving — “ look — underneath 
that, Arithmancy, nine o’clock. I mean, I know you’re 
good, Hermione, but no one’s that good. How’re you 
supposed to be in three classes at once?” 

“Don’t be silly,” said Hermione shortly. “Of course I 
won’t be in three classes at once.” 

“Well, then — ” 

“Pass the marmalade,” said Hermione. 

“But — ” 

“Oh, Ron, what’s it to you if my schedule’s a bit full?” 
Hermione snapped. “I told you, I’ve fixed it all with 
Professor McGonagall.” 

Just then, Hagrid entered the Great Hall. He was 
wearing his long moleskin overcoat and was 
absentmindedly swinging a dead polecat from one 
enormous hand. 

“All righ’?” he said eagerly, pausing on the way to the 
staff table. “Yer in my firs’ ever lesson! Right after 
lunch! Bin up since five gettin’ everythin’ ready. ... 
Hope it’s okay. ... Me, a teacher ... hones’ly. ...” 



Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He grinned broadly at them and headed off to the 
staff table, still swinging the polecat. 

“Wonder what he’s been getting ready?” said Ron, a 
note of anxiety in his voice. 

The hall was starting to empty as people headed off 
toward their first lesson. Ron checked his course 
schedule. 

“We’d better go, look, Divination’s at the top of North 
Tower. It’ll take us ten minutes to get there. ...” 

They finished their breakfasts hastily, said good-bye 
to Fred and George, and walked back through the 
hall. As they passed the Slytherin table, Malfoy did 
yet another impression of a fainting fit. The shouts of 
laughter followed Harry into the entrance hall. 

The journey through the castle to North Tower was a 
long one. Two years at Hogwarts hadn’t taught them 
everything about the castle, and they had never been 
inside North Tower before. 

“There’s — got — to — be — a — shortcut,” Ron 
panted as they climbed their seventh long staircase 
and emerged on an unfamiliar landing, where there 
was nothing but a large painting of a bare stretch of 
grass hanging on the stone wall. 

“I think it’s this way,” said Hermione, peering down 
the empty passage to the right. 

“Can’t be,” said Ron. “That’s south, look, you can see 
a bit of the lake out of the window ...” 

Harry was watching the painting. A fat, dapple-gray 
pony had just ambled onto the grass and was grazing 
nonchalantly. Harry was used to the subjects of 

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hogwarts paintings moving around and leaving their 
frames to visit one another, but he always enjoyed 
watching it. A moment later, a short, squat knight in 
a suit of armor clanked into the picture after his 
pony. By the look of the grass stains on his metal 
knees, he had just fallen off. 

“Aha!” he yelled, seeing Harry, Ron, and Hermione. 
“What villains are these, that trespass upon my 
private lands! Come to scorn at my fall, perchance? 
Draw, you knaves, you dogs!” 

They watched in astonishment as the little knight 
tugged his sword out of its scabbard and began 
brandishing it violently, hopping up and down in 
rage. But the sword was too long for him; a 
particularly wild swing made him overbalance, and he 
landed facedown in the grass. 

“Are you all right?” said Harry, moving closer to the 
picture. 

“Get back, you scurvy braggart! Back, you rogue!” 

The knight seized his sword again and used it to push 
himself back up, but the blade sank deeply into the 
grass and, though he pulled with all his might, he 
couldn’t get it out again. Finally, he had to flop back 
down onto the grass and push up his visor to mop his 
sweating face. 

“Listen,” said Harry, taking advantage of the knight’s 
exhaustion, “we’re looking for the North Tower. You 
don’t know the way, do you?” 

“A quest!” The knight’s rage seemed to vanish 
instantly. He clanked to his feet and shouted, “Come 
follow me, dear friends, and we shall find our goal, or 
else shall perish bravely in the charge!” 

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He gave the sword another fruitless tug, tried and 
failed to mount the fat pony, gave up, and cried, “On 
foot then, good sirs and gentle lady! On! On!” 

And he ran, clanking loudly, into the left side of the 
frame and out of sight. 

They hurried after him along the corridor, following 
the sound of his armor. Every now and then they 
spotted him running through a picture ahead. 

“Be of stout heart, the worst is yet to come!” yelled the 
knight, and they saw him reappear in front of an 
alarmed group of women in crinolines, whose picture 
hung on the wall of a narrow spiral staircase. 

Puffing loudly, Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed the 
tightly spiraling steps, getting dizzier and dizzier, 
until at last they heard the murmur of voices above 
them and knew they had reached the classroom. 

“Farewell!” cried the knight, popping his head into a 
painting of some sinister-looking monks. “Farewell, 
my comrades-in-arms! If ever you have need of noble 
heart and steely sinew, call upon Sir Cadogan!” 

“Yeah, well call you,” muttered Ron as the knight 
disappeared, “if we ever need someone mental.” 

They climbed the last few steps and emerged onto a 
tiny landing, where most of the class was already 
assembled. There were no doors off this landing, but 
Ron nudged Harry and pointed at the ceiling, where 
there was a circular trapdoor with a brass plaque on 
it. 

“ ‘Sibyll Trelawney, Divination teacher,’ ” Harry read. 
“How’re we supposed to get up there?” 



Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




As though in answer to his question, the trapdoor 
suddenly opened, and a silvery ladder descended 
right at Harry’s feet. Everyone got quiet. 

“After you,” said Ron, grinning, so Harry climbed the 
ladder first. 

He emerged into the strangest-looking classroom he 
had ever seen. In fact, it didn’t look like a classroom 
at all, more like a cross between someone’s attic and 
an old-fashioned tea shop. At least twenty small, 
circular tables were crammed inside it, all 
surrounded by chintz armchairs and fat little poufs. 
Everything was lit with a dim, crimson light; the 
curtains at the windows were all closed, and the 
many lamps were draped with dark red scarves. It 
was stiflingly warm, and the fire that was burning 
under the crowded mantelpiece was giving off a 
heavy, sickly sort of perfume as it heated a large 
copper kettle. The shelves running around the 
circular walls were crammed with dusty-looking 
feathers, stubs of candles, many packs of tattered 
playing cards, countless silvery crystal balls, and a 
huge array of teacups. 

Ron appeared at Harry’s shoulder as the class 
assembled around them, all talking in whispers. 

“Where is she?” Ron said. 

A voice came suddenly out of the shadows, a soft, 
misty sort of voice. 

“Welcome,” it said. “How nice to see you in the 
physical world at last.” 

Harry’s immediate impression was of a large, 
glittering insect. Professor Trelawney moved into the 
firelight, and they saw that she was very thin; her 

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




large glasses magnified her eyes to several times their 
natural size, and she was draped in a gauzy spangled 
shawl. Innumerable chains and beads hung around 
her spindly neck, and her arms and hands were 
encrusted with bangles and rings. 

“Sit, my children, sit,” she said, and they all climbed 
awkwardly into armchairs or sank onto poufs. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione sat themselves around the same 
round table. 

“Welcome to Divination,” said Professor Trelawney, 
who had seated herself in a winged armchair in front 
of the fire. “My name is Professor Trelawney. You may 
not have seen me before. I find that descending too 
often into the hustle and bustle of the main school 
clouds my Inner Eye.” 

Nobody said anything to this extraordinary 
pronouncement. Professor Trelawney delicately 
rearranged her shawl and continued, “So you have 
chosen to study Divination, the most difficult of all 
magical arts. I must warn you at the outset that if 
you do not have the Sight, there is very little I will be 
able to teach you. Books can take you only so far in 
this field. ...” 

At these words, both Harry and Ron glanced, 
grinning, at Hermione, who looked startled at the 
news that books wouldn’t be much help in this 
subject. 

“Many witches and wizards, talented though they are 
in the area of loud bangs and smells and sudden 
disappearings, are yet unable to penetrate the veiled 
mysteries of the future,” Professor Trelawney went on, 
her enormous, gleaming eyes moving from face to 
nervous face. “It is a Gift granted to few. You, boy,” 



Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




she said suddenly to Neville, who almost toppled off 
his pouf. “Is your grandmother well?” 



“I think so,” said Neville tremulously. 

“I wouldn’t be so sure if I were you, dear,” said 
Professor Trelawney, the firelight glinting on her long 
emerald earrings. Neville gulped. Professor Trelawney 
continued placidly. “We will be covering the basic 
methods of Divination this year. The first term will be 
devoted to reading the tea leaves. Next term we shall 
progress to palmistry. By the way, my dear,” she shot 
suddenly at Parvati Patil, “beware a red-haired man.” 

Parvati gave a startled look at Ron, who was right 
behind her, and edged her chair away from him. 

“In the second term,” Professor Trelawney went on, 

“we shall progress to the crystal ball — if we have 
finished with fire omens, that is. Unfortunately, 
classes will be disrupted in February by a nasty bout 
of flu. I myself will lose my voice. And around Easter, 
one of our number will leave us forever.” 

A very tense silence followed this pronouncement, but 
Professor Trelawney seemed unaware of it. 

“I wonder, dear,” she said to Lavender Brown, who 
was nearest and shrank back in her chair, “if you 
could pass me the largest silver teapot?” 

Lavender, looking relieved, stood up, took an 
enormous teapot from the shelf, and put it down on 
the table in front of Professor Trelawney. 

“Thank you, my dear. Incidentally, that thing you are 
dreading — it will happen on Friday the sixteenth of 
October.” 

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Lavender trembled. 



“Now, I want you all to divide into pairs. Collect a 
teacup from the shelf, come to me, and I will fill it. 
Then sit down and drink, drink until only the dregs 
remain. Swill these around the cup three times with 
the left hand, then turn the cup upside down on its 
saucer, wait for the last of the tea to drain away, then 
give your cup to your partner to read. You will 
interpret the patterns using pages five and six of 
Unfogging the Future. I shall move among you, helping 
and instructing. Oh, and dear” — she caught Neville 
by the arm as he made to stand up — “after you’ve 
broken your first cup, would you be so kind as to 
select one of the blue patterned ones? I’m rather 
attached to the pink.” 

Sure enough, Neville had no sooner reached the shelf 
of teacups when there was a tinkle of breaking china. 
Professor Trelawney swept over to him holding a 
dustpan and brush and said, “One of the blue ones, 
then, dear, if you wouldn’t mind ... thank you. ...” 

When Harry and Ron had had their teacups filled, 
they went back to their table and tried to drink the 
scalding tea quickly. They swilled the dregs around as 
Professor Trelawney had instructed, then drained the 
cups and swapped over. 

“Right,” said Ron as they both opened their books at 
pages five and six. “What can you see in mine?” 

“A load of soggy brown stuff,” said Harry. The heavily 
perfumed smoke in the room was making him feel 
sleepy and stupid. 

“Broaden your minds, my dears, and allow your eyes 
to see past the mundane!” Professor Trelawney cried 
through the gloom. 

Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry tried to pull himself together. 

“Right, you’ve got a crooked sort of cross ...” He 
consulted Unfogging the Future. “That means you’re 
going to have ‘trials and suffering’ — sorry about that 
— but there’s a thing that could be the sun ... hang 
on ... that means ‘great happiness’ ... so you’re going 
to suffer but be very happy. ...” 

“You need your Inner Eye tested, if you ask me,” said 
Ron, and they both had to stifle their laughs as 
Professor Trelawney gazed in their direction. 

“My turn ...” Ron peered into Harry’s teacup, his 
forehead wrinkled with effort. “There’s a blob a bit like 
a bowler hat,” he said. “Maybe you’re going to work 
for the Ministry of Magic. ...” 

He turned the teacup the other way up. 

“But this way it looks more like an acorn. ... What’s 
that?” He scanned his copy of Unfogging the Future. “ 
‘A windfall, unexpected gold.’ Excellent, you can lend 
me some ... and there’s a thing here,” he turned the 
cup again, “that looks like an animal . . . yeah, if that 
was its head ... it looks like a hippo ... no, a sheep ...” 

Professor Trelawney whirled around as Harry let out a 
snort of laughter. 

“Let me see that, my dear,” she said reprovingly to 
Ron, sweeping over and snatching Harry’s cup from 
him. Everyone went quiet to watch. 

Professor Trelawney was staring into the teacup, 
rotating it counterclockwise. 

“The falcon ... my dear, you have a deadly enemy.” 



Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But everyone knows that,” said Hermione in a loud 
whisper. Professor Trelawney stared at her. 

“Well, they do,” said Hermione. “Everybody knows 
about Harry and You-Know-Who.” 

Harry and Ron stared at her with a mixture of 
amazement and admiration. They had never heard 
Hermione speak to a teacher like that before. 

Professor Trelawney chose not to reply. She lowered 
her huge eyes to Harry’s cup again and continued to 
turn it. 

“The club ... an attack. Dear, dear, this is not a happy 
cup. ...” 

“I thought that was a bowler hat,” said Ron 
sheepishly. 

“The skull ... danger in your path, my dear. ...” 

Everyone was staring, transfixed, at Professor 
Trelawney, who gave the cup a final turn, gasped, and 
then screamed. 

There was another tinkle of breaking china; Neville 
had smashed his second cup. Professor Trelawney 
sank into a vacant armchair, her glittering hand at 
her heart and her eyes closed. 

“My dear boy . . . my poor, dear boy ... no ... it is 
kinder not to say ... no ... don’t ask me. ...” 

“What is it, Professor?” said Dean Thomas at once. 
Everyone had got to their feet, and slowly they 
crowded around Harry and Ron’s table, pressing close 
to Professor Trelawney’s chair to get a good look at 
Harry’s cup. 



Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“My dear,” Professor Trelawney’s huge eyes opened 
dramatically, “you have the Grim.” 



“The what?” said Harry. 

He could tell that he wasn’t the only one who didn’t 
understand; Dean Thomas shrugged at him and 
Lavender Brown looked puzzled, but nearly everybody 
else clapped their hands to their mouths in horror. 

“The Grim, my dear, the Grim!” cried Professor 
Trelawney, who looked shocked that Harry hadn’t 
understood. “The giant, spectral dog that haunts 
churchyards! My dear boy, it is an omen — the worst 
omen — of death .!” 

Harry’s stomach lurched. That dog on the cover of 
Death Omens in Flourish and Blotts — the dog in the 
shadows of Magnolia Crescent . . . Lavender Brown 
clapped her hands to her mouth too. Everyone was 
looking at Harry, everyone except Hermione, who had 
gotten up and moved around to the back of Professor 
Trelawney’s chair. 

“I don’t think it looks like a Grim,” she said flatly. 

Professor Trelawney surveyed Hermione with 
mounting dislike. 

“You’ll forgive me for saying so, my dear, but I 
perceive very little aura around you. Very little 
receptivity to the resonances of the future.” 

Seamus Finnigan was tilting his head from side to 
side. 

“It looks like a Grim if you do this,” he said, with his 
eyes almost shut, “but it looks more like a donkey 
from here,” he said, leaning to the left. 

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“When you’ve all finished deciding whether I’m going 
to die or not!” said Harry, taking even himself by 
surprise. Now nobody seemed to want to look at him. 

“I think we will leave the lesson here for today,” said 
Professor Trelawney in her mistiest voice. “Yes ... 
please pack away your things. ...” 

Silently the class took their teacups back to Professor 
Trelawney, packed away their books, and closed their 
bags. Even Ron was avoiding Harry’s eyes. 

“Until we meet again,” said Professor Trelawney 
faintly, “fair fortune be yours. Oh, and dear” — she 
pointed at Neville — “you’ll be late next time, so mind 
you work extra-hard to catch up.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione descended Professor 
Trelawney’s ladder and the winding stair in silence, 
then set off for Professor McGonagall’s 
Transfiguration lesson. It took them so long to find 
her classroom that, early as they had left Divination, 
they were only just in time. 

Harry chose a seat right at the back of the room, 
feeling as though he were sitting in a very bright 
spotlight; the rest of the class kept shooting furtive 
glances at him, as though he were about to drop dead 
at any moment. He hardly heard what Professor 
McGonagall was telling them about Animagi (wizards 
who could transform at will into animals), and wasn’t 
even watching when she transformed herself in front 
of their eyes into a tabby cat with spectacle markings 
around her eyes. 

“Really, what has got into you all today?” said 
Professor McGonagall, turning back into herself with 
a faint pop, and staring around at them all. “Not that 



Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




it matters, but that’s the first time my 
transformation’s not got applause from a class.” 



Everybody’s heads turned toward Harry again, but 
nobody spoke. Then Hermione raised her hand. 

“Please, Professor, we’ve just had our first Divination 
class, and we were reading the tea leaves, and — ” 

“Ah, of course,” said Professor McGonagall, suddenly 
frowning. “There is no need to say any more, Miss 
Granger. Tell me, which of you will be dying this 
year?” 

Everyone stared at her. 

“Me,” said Harry, finally. 

“I see,” said Professor McGonagall, fixing Harry with 
her beady eyes. “Then you should know, Potter, that 
Sibyll Trelawney has predicted the death of one 
student a year since she arrived at this school. None 
of them has died yet. Seeing death omens is her 
favorite way of greeting a new class. If it were not for 
the fact that I never speak ill of my colleagues — ” 

Professor McGonagall broke off, and they saw that her 
nostrils had gone white. She went on, more calmly, 
“Divination is one of the most imprecise branches of 
magic. I shall not conceal from you that I have very 
little patience with it. True Seers are very rare, and 
Professor Trelawney — ” 

She stopped again, and then said, in a very matter-of- 
fact tone, “You look in excellent health to me, Potter, 
so you will excuse me if I don’t let you off homework 
today. I assure you that if you die, you need not hand 
it in.” 

Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione laughed. Harry felt a bit better. It was 
harder to feel scared of a lump of tea leaves away 
from the dim red light and befuddling perfume of 
Professor Trelawney’s classroom. Not everyone was 
convinced, however. Ron still looked worried, and 
Lavender whispered, “But what about Neville’s cup?” 

When the Transfiguration class had finished, they 
joined the crowd thundering toward the Great Hall for 
lunch. 

“Ron, cheer up,” said Hermione, pushing a dish of 
stew toward him. “You heard what Professor 
McGonagall said.” 

Ron spooned stew onto his plate and picked up his 
fork but didn’t start. 

“Harry,” he said, in a low, serious voice, “you haven’t 
seen a great black dog anywhere, have you?” 

“Yeah, I have,” said Harry. “I saw one the night I left 
the Dursleys’.” 

Ron let his fork fall with a clatter. 

“Probably a stray,” said Hermione calmly. 

Ron looked at Hermione as though she had gone 
mad. 

“Hermione, if Harry’s seen a Grim, that’s — that’s 
bad,” he said. “My — my uncle Bilius saw one and — 
and he died twenty-four hours later!” 

“Coincidence,” said Hermione airily, pouring herself 
some pumpkin juice. 



Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” said Ron, 
starting to get angry. “Grims scare the living daylights 
out of most wizards!” 

“There you are, then,” said Hermione in a superior 
tone. “They see the Grim and die of fright. The Grim’s 
not an omen, it’s the cause of death! And Harry’s still 
with us because he’s not stupid enough to see one 
and think, right, well, I’d better kick the bucket then!” 

Ron mouthed wordlessly at Hermione, who opened 
her bag, took out her new Arithmancy book, and 
propped it open against the juice jug. 

“I think Divination seems very woolly,” she said, 
searching for her page. “A lot of guesswork, if you ask 
me.” 

“There was nothing woolly about the Grim in that 
cup!” said Ron hotly. 

“You didn’t seem quite so confident when you were 
telling Harry it was a sheep,” said Hermione coolly. 

“Professor Trelawney said you didn’t have the right 
aura! You just don’t like being bad at something for a 
change!” 

He had touched a nerve. Hermione slammed her 
Arithmancy book down on the table so hard that bits 
of meat and carrot flew everywhere. 

“If being good at Divination means I have to pretend 
to see death omens in a lump of tea leaves, I’m not 
sure I’ll be studying it much longer! That lesson was 
absolute rubbish compared with my Arithmancy 
class!” 



She snatched up her bag and stalked away. 

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron frowned after her. 



“What’s she talking about?” he said to Harry. “She 
hasn’t been to an Arithmancy class yet.” 

Harry was pleased to get out of the castle after lunch. 
Yesterday’s rain had cleared; the sky was a clear, pale 
gray, and the grass was springy and damp underfoot 
as they set off for their first ever Care of Magical 
Creatures class. 

Ron and Hermione weren’t speaking to each other. 
Harry walked beside them in silence as they went 
down the sloping lawns to Hagrid’s hut on the edge of 
the Forbidden Forest. It was only when he spotted 
three only-too-familiar backs ahead of them that he 
realized they must be having these lessons with the 
Slytherins. Malfoy was talking animatedly to Crabbe 
and Goyle, who were chortling. Harry was quite sure 
he knew what they were talking about. 

Hagrid was waiting for his class at the door of his hut. 
He stood in his moleskin overcoat, with Fang the 
boarhound at his heels, looking impatient to start. 

“C’mon, now, get a move on!” he called as the class 
approached. “Got a real treat for yeh today! Great 
lesson cornin’ up! Everyone here? Right, follow me!” 

For one nasty moment, Harry thought that Hagrid 
was going to lead them into the forest; Harry had had 
enough unpleasant experiences in there to last him a 
lifetime. However, Hagrid strolled off around the edge 
of the trees, and five minutes later, they found 
themselves outside a kind of paddock. There was 
nothing in there. 



Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Everyone gather ’round the fence here!” he called. 
“That’s it — make sure yeh can see — now, firs’ thing 
yeh’ll want ter do is open yer books — ” 

“How?” said the cold, drawling voice of Draco Malfoy. 

“Eh?” said Hagrid. 

“How do we open our books?” Malfoy repeated. He 
took out his copy of The Monster Book of Monsters, 
which he had bound shut with a length of rope. Other 
people took theirs out too; some, like Harry, had 
belted their book shut; others had crammed them 
inside tight bags or clamped them together with 
binder clips. 

“Hasn’ — hasn’ anyone bin able ter open their 
books?” said Hagrid, looking crestfallen. 

The class all shook their heads. 

“Yeh’ve got ter stroke ’em,” said Hagrid, as though 
this was the most obvious thing in the world. “Look — 



He took Hermione’s copy and ripped off the Spellotape 
that bound it. The book tried to bite, but Hagrid ran a 
giant forefinger down its spine, and the book 
shivered, and then fell open and lay quiet in his hand. 

“Oh, how silly we’ve all been!” Malfoy sneered. “We 
should have stroked them! Why didn’t we guess!” 

“I — I thought they were funny,” Hagrid said 
uncertainly to Hermione. 

“Oh, tremendously funny!” said Malfoy. “Really witty, 
giving us books that try and rip our hands off!” 



Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Shut up, Malfoy,” said Harry quietly. Hagrid was 
looking downcast and Harry wanted Hagrid ’s first 
lesson to be a success. 

“Righ’ then,” said Hagrid, who seemed to have lost his 
thread, “so — so yeh’ve got yer books an’ — an’ — 
now yeh need the Magical Creatures. Yeah. So I’ll go 
an’ get ’em. Hang on ...” 

He strode away from them into the forest and out of 
sight. 

“God, this place is going to the dogs,” said Malfoy 
loudly. “That oaf teaching classes, my father’ll have a 
fit when I tell him — ” 

“Shut up, Malfoy,” Harry repeated. 

“Careful, Potter, there’s a dementor behind you — ” 

“Oooooooh!” squealed Lavender Brown, pointing 
toward the opposite side of the paddock. 

Trotting toward them were a dozen of the most bizarre 
creatures Harry had ever seen. They had the bodies, 
hind legs, and tails of horses, but the front legs, 
wings, and heads of what seemed to be giant eagles, 
with cruel, steel-colored beaks and large, brilliantly 
orange eyes. The talons on their front legs were half a 
foot long and deadly looking. Each of the beasts had a 
thick leather collar around its neck, which was 
attached to a long chain, and the ends of all of these 
were held in the vast hands of Hagrid, who came 
jogging into the paddock behind the creatures. 

“Gee up, there!” he roared, shaking the chains and 
urging the creatures toward the fence where the class 
stood. Everyone drew back slightly as Hagrid reached 
them and tethered the creatures to the fence. 

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Hippogriffs!” Hagrid roared happily, waving a hand at 
them. “Beau’iful, aren’ they?” 

Harry could sort of see what Hagrid meant. Once you 
got over the first shock of seeing something that was 
half horse, half bird, you started to appreciate the 
hippogriffs’ gleaming coats, changing smoothly from 
feather to hair, each of them a different color: stormy 
gray, bronze, pinkish roan, gleaming chestnut, and 
inky black. 

“So,” said Hagrid, rubbing his hands together and 
beaming around, “if yeh wan’ ter come a bit nearer — ” 

No one seemed to want to. Harry, Ron, and Hermione, 
however, approached the fence cautiously. 

“Now, firs’ thing yeh gotta know abou’ hippogriffs is, 
they’re proud,” said Hagrid. “Easily offended, 
hippogriffs are. Don’t never insult one, ’cause it might 
be the last thing yeh do.” 

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle weren’t listening; they 
were talking in an undertone and Harry had a nasty 
feeling they were plotting how best to disrupt the 
lesson. 

“Yeh always wait fer the hippogriff ter make the firs’ 
move,” Hagrid continued. “It’s polite, see? Yeh walk 
toward him, and yeh bow, an’ yeh wait. If he bows 
back, yeh’re allowed ter touch him. If he doesn’ bow, 
then get away from him sharpish, ’cause those talons 
hurt. 

“Right — who wants ter go first?” 

Most of the class backed farther away in answer. 

Even Harry, Ron, and Hermione had misgivings. The 
hippogriffs were tossing their fierce heads and flexing 

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




their powerful wings; they didn’t seem to like being 
tethered like this. 

“No one?” said Hagrid, with a pleading look. 

“I’ll do it,” said Harry. 

There was an intake of breath from behind him, and 
both Lavender and Parvati whispered, “Oooh, no, 
Harry, remember your tea leaves!” 

Harry ignored them. He climbed over the paddock 
fence. 

“Good man, Harry!” roared Hagrid. “Right then — let’s 
see how yeh get on with Buckbeak.” 

He untied one of the chains, pulled the gray hippogriff 
away from its fellows, and slipped off its leather 
collar. The class on the other side of the paddock 
seemed to be holding its breath. Malfoy’s eyes were 
narrowed maliciously. 

“Easy, now, Harry,” said Hagrid quietly. “Yeh’ve got 
eye contact, now try not ter blink. ... Hippogriffs don’ 
trust yeh if yeh blink too much. ...” 

Harry’s eyes immediately began to water, but he 
didn’t shut them. Buckbeak had turned his great, 
sharp head and was staring at Harry with one fierce 
orange eye. 

“Tha’s it,” said Hagrid. “Tha’s it, Harry ... now, bow 



Harry didn’t feel much like exposing the back of his 
neck to Buckbeak, but he did as he was told. He gave 
a short bow and then looked up. 



Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The hippogriff was still staring haughtily at him. It 
didn’t move. 

“Ah,” said Hagrid, sounding worried. “Right — back 
away, now, Harry, easy does it — ” 

But then, to Harry’s enormous surprise, the hippogriff 
suddenly bent its scaly front knees and sank into 
what was an unmistakable bow. 

“Well done, Harry!” said Hagrid, ecstatic. “Right — 
yeh can touch him! Pat his beak, go on!” 

Feeling that a better reward would have been to back 
away, Harry moved slowly toward the hippogriff and 
reached out toward it. He patted the beak several 
times and the hippogriff closed its eyes lazily, as 
though enjoying it. 

The class broke into applause, all except for Malfoy, 
Crabbe, and Goyle, who were looking deeply 
disappointed. 

“Righ’ then, Harry,” said Hagrid. “I reckon he might’ 
let yeh ride him!” 

This was more than Harry had bargained for. He was 
used to a broomstick; but he wasn’t sure a hippogriff 
would be quite the same. 

“Yeh climb up there, jus’ behind the wing joint,” said 
Hagrid, “an’ mind yeh don’ pull any of his feathers 
out, he won’ like that. ...” 

Harry put his foot on the top of Buckbeak’s wing and 
hoisted himself onto its back. Buckbeak stood up. 
Harry wasn’t sure where to hold on; everything in 
front of him was covered with feathers. 



Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Go on, then!” roared Hagrid, slapping the hippogriff’s 
hindquarters. 

Without warning, twelve-foot wings flapped open on 
either side of Harry; he just had time to seize the 
hippogriff around the neck before he was soaring 
upward. It was nothing like a broomstick, and Harry 
knew which one he preferred; the hippogriff’s wings 
beat uncomfortably on either side of him, catching 
him under his legs and making him feel he was about 
to be thrown off; the glossy feathers slipped under his 
fingers and he didn’t dare get a stronger grip; instead 
of the smooth action of his Nimbus Two Thousand, he 
now felt himself rocking backward and forward as the 
hindquarters of the hippogriff rose and fell with its 
wings. 

Buckbeak flew him once around the paddock and 
then headed back to the ground; this was the bit 
Harry had been dreading; he leaned back as the 
smooth neck lowered, feeling he was going to slip off 
over the beak, then felt a heavy thud as the four ill- 
assorted feet hit the ground. He just managed to hold 
on and push himself straight again. 

“Good work, Harry!” roared Hagrid as everyone except 
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle cheered. “Okay, who else 
wants a go?” 

Emboldened by Harry’s success, the rest of the class 
climbed cautiously into the paddock. Hagrid untied 
the hippogriffs one by one, and soon people were 
bowing nervously, all over the paddock. Neville ran 
repeatedly backward from his, which didn’t seem to 
want to bend its knees. Ron and Hermione practiced 
on the chestnut, while Harry watched. 



Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had taken over Buckbeak. 
He had bowed to Malfoy, who was now patting his 
beak, looking disdainful. 

“This is very easy,” Malfoy drawled, loud enough for 
Harry to hear him. “I knew it must have been, if 
Potter could do it. ... I bet you’re not dangerous at all, 
are you?” he said to the hippogriff. “Are you, you great 
ugly brute?” 

It happened in a flash of steely talons; Malfoy let out a 
high-pitched scream and next moment, Hagrid was 
wrestling Buckbeak back into his collar as he 
strained to get at Malfoy, who lay curled in the grass, 
blood blossoming over his robes. 

“I’m dying!” Malfoy yelled as the class panicked. “I’m 
dying, look at me! It’s killed me!” 

“Yer not dyin’!” said Hagrid, who had gone very white. 
“Someone help me — gotta get him outta here — ” 

Hermione ran to hold open the gate as Hagrid lifted 
Malfoy easily. As they passed, Harry saw that there 
was a long, deep gash on Malfoy’s arm; blood 
splattered the grass and Hagrid ran with him, up the 
slope toward the castle. 

Very shaken, the Care of Magical Creatures class 
followed at a walk. The Slytherins were all shouting 
about Hagrid. 

“They should fire him straight away!” said Pansy 
Parkinson, who was in tears. 

“It was Malfoy’s fault!” snapped Dean Thomas. 

Crabbe and Goyle flexed their muscles threateningly. 



Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They all climbed the stone steps into the deserted 
entrance hall. 

“I’m going to see if he’s okay!” said Pansy, and they all 
watched her run up the marble staircase. The 
Slytherins, still muttering about Hagrid, headed away 
in the direction of their dungeon common room; 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione proceeded upstairs to 
Gryffindor Tower. 

“D’you think he’ll be all right?” said Hermione 
nervously. 

“ ’Course he will. Madam Pomfrey can mend cuts in 
about a second,” said Harry, who had had far worse 
injuries mended magically by the nurse. 

“That was a really bad thing to happen in Hagrid ’s 
first class, though, wasn’t it?” said Ron, looking 
worried. “Trust Malfoy to mess things up for him. ...” 

They were among the first to reach the Great Hall at 
dinnertime, hoping to see Hagrid, but he wasn’t there. 

“They wouldn’t fire him, would they?” said Hermione 
anxiously, not touching her steak-and-kidney 
pudding. 

“They’d better not,” said Ron, who wasn’t eating 
either. 

Harry was watching the Slytherin table. A large group 
including Crabbe and Goyle was huddled together, 
deep in conversation. Harry was sure they were 
cooking up their own version of how Malfoy had been 
injured. 

“Well, you can’t say it wasn’t an interesting first day 
back,” said Ron gloomily. 

Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They went up to the crowded Gryffindor common 
room after dinner and tried to do the homework 
Professor McGonagall had given them, but all three of 
them kept breaking off and glancing out of the tower 
window. 

“There’s a light on in Hagrid’s window,” Harry said 
suddenly. 

Ron looked at his watch. 

“If we hurried, we could go down and see him. It’s still 
quite early. ...” 

“I don’t know,” Hermione said slowly, and Harry saw 
her glance at him. 

“I’m allowed to walk across the grounds,” he said 
pointedly. “Sirius Black hasn’t got past the dementors 
yet, has he?” 

So they put their things away and headed out of the 
portrait hole, glad to meet nobody on their way to the 
front doors, as they weren’t entirely sure they were 
supposed to be out. 

The grass was still wet and looked almost black in the 
twilight. When they reached Hagrid’s hut, they 
knocked, and a voice growled, “C’min.” 

Hagrid was sitting in his shirtsleeves at his scrubbed 
wooden table; his boarhound, Fang, had his head in 
Hagrid’s lap. One look told them that Hagrid had been 
drinking a lot; there was a pewter tankard almost as 
big as a bucket in front of him, and he seemed to be 
having difficulty getting them into focus. 



Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ ’Spect it’s a record,” he said thickly, when he 
recognized them. “Don’ reckon they’ve ever had a 
teacher who lasted on’y a day before.” 

“You haven’t been fired, Hagrid!” gasped Hermione. 

“Not yet,” said Hagrid miserably, taking a huge gulp 
of whatever was in the tankard. “But ’s only a matter 
o’ time, i’n’t it, after Malfoy ...” 

“How is he?” said Ron as they all sat down. “It wasn’t 
serious, was it?” 

“Madam Pomfrey fixed him best she could,” said 
Hagrid dully, “but he’s sayin’ it’s still agony ... covered 
in bandages ... moanin’ ...” 

“He’s faking it,” said Harry at once. “Madam Pomfrey 
can mend anything. She regrew half my bones last 
year. Trust Malfoy to milk it for all it’s worth.” 

“School gov’nors have bin told, o’ course,” said Hagrid 
miserably. “They reckon I started too big. Shoulda left 
hippogriffs fer later ... done flobberworms or summat. 
... Jus’ thought it’d make a good firs’ lesson. ... ’S all 
my fault. ...” 

“It’s all Malfoy ’s fault, Hagrid!” said Hermione 
earnestly. 

“We’re witnesses,” said Harry. “You said hippogriffs 
attack if you insult them. It’s Malfoy’s problem that 
he wasn’t listening. We’ll tell Dumbledore what really 
happened.” 

“Yeah, don’t worry, Hagrid, we’ll back you up,” said 
Ron. 



Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Tears leaked out of the crinkled corners of Hagrid ’s 
beetle-black eyes. He grabbed both Harry and Ron 
and pulled them into a bone-breaking hug. 

“I think you’ve had enough to drink, Hagrid,” said 
Hermione firmly. She took the tankard from the table 
and went outside to empty it. 

“Ar, maybe she’s right,” said Hagrid, letting go of 
Harry and Ron, who both staggered away, rubbing 
their ribs. Hagrid heaved himself out of his chair and 
followed Hermione unsteadily outside. They heard a 
loud splash. 

“What’s he done?” said Harry nervously as Hermione 
came back in with the empty tankard. 

“Stuck his head in the water barrel,” said Hermione, 
putting the tankard away. 

Hagrid came back, his long hair and beard sopping 
wet, wiping the water out of his eyes. 

“Tha’s better,” he said, shaking his head like a dog 
and drenching them all. “Listen, it was good of yeh ter 
come an’ see me, I really — ” 

Hagrid stopped dead, staring at Harry as though he’d 
only just realized he was there. 

“WHAT DYEH THINK YOU’RE DOIN’, EH?” he roared, 
so suddenly that they jumped a foot in the air. 

“YEH ’RE NOT TO GO WANDERIN’ AROUND AFTER 
DARK, HARRY! AN’ YOU TWO! LETTIN’ HIM!” 

Hagrid strode over to Harry, grabbed his arm, and 
pulled him to the door. 



Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“C’mon!” Hagrid said angrily. “I’m takin’yer all back 
up ter school, an’ don’ let me catch yeh walkin’ down 
ter see me after dark again. I’m not worth that!” 



Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




7 




THE BOGGART IN THE WARDROBE 

Malfoy didn’t reappear in classes until late on 
Thursday morning, when the Slytherins and 
Gryffindors were halfway through double Potions. He 
swaggered into the dungeon, his right arm covered in 
bandages and bound up in a sling, acting, in Harry’s 
opinion, as though he were the heroic survivor of 
some dreadful battle. 

“How is it, Draco?” simpered Pansy Parkinson. “Does 
it hurt much?” 

“Yeah,” said Malfoy, putting on a brave sort of 
grimace. But Harry saw him wink at Crabbe and 
Goyle when Pansy had looked away. 

“Settle down, settle down,” said Professor Snape idly. 

Harry and Ron scowled at each other; Snape wouldn’t 
have said “settle down” if they’d walked in late, he’d 
have given them detention. But Malfoy had always 
been able to get away with anything in Snape ’s 

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



classes; Snape was head of Slytherin House, and 
generally favored his own students above all others. 



They were making a new potion today, a Shrinking 
Solution. Malfoy set up his cauldron right next to 
Harry and Ron, so that they were preparing their 
ingredients on the same table. 

“Sir,” Malfoy called, “sir, I’ll need help cutting up 
these daisy roots, because of my arm — ” 

“Weasley, cut up Malfoy’s roots for him,” said Snape 
without looking up. 

Ron went brick red. 

“There’s nothing wrong with your arm,” he hissed at 
Malfoy. 

Malfoy smirked across the table. 

“Weasley, you heard Professor Snape; cut up these 
roots.” 

Ron seized his knife, pulled Malfoy’s roots toward 
him, and began to chop them roughly, so that they 
were all different sizes. 

“Professor,” drawled Malfoy, “Weasley’s mutilating my 
roots, sir.” 

Snape approached their table, stared down his 
hooked nose at the roots, then gave Ron an 
unpleasant smile from beneath his long, greasy black 
hair. 

“Change roots with Malfoy, Weasley.” 

“But, sir — !” 

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron had spent the last quarter of an hour carefully 
shredding his own roots into exactly equal pieces. 

“Now,” said Snape in his most dangerous voice. 

Ron shoved his own beautifully cut roots across the 
table at Malfoy, then took up the knife again. 

“And, sir, 111 need this shrivelfig skinned,” said 
Malfoy, his voice full of malicious laughter. 

“Potter, you can skin Malfoy’s shrivelfig,” said Snape, 
giving Harry the look of loathing he always reserved 
just for him. 

Harry took Malfoy’s shrivelfig as Ron began trying to 
repair the damage to the roots he now had to use. 
Harry skinned the shrivelfig as fast as he could and 
flung it back across the table at Malfoy without 
speaking. Malfoy was smirking more broadly than 
ever. 

“Seen your pal Hagrid lately?” he asked them quietly. 

“None of your business,” said Ron jerkily, without 
looking up. 

“I’m afraid he won’t be a teacher much longer,” said 
Malfoy in a tone of mock sorrow. “Father’s not very 
happy about my injury — ” 

“Keep talking, Malfoy, and I’ll give you a real injury,” 
snarled Ron. 

“ — he’s complained to the school governors. And to 
the Ministry of Magic. Father’s got a lot of influence, 
you know. And a lasting injury like this” — he gave a 
huge, fake sigh — “who knows if my arm’ll ever be the 
same again?” 

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“So that’s why you’re putting it on,” said Harry, 
accidentally beheading a dead caterpillar because his 
hand was shaking in anger. “To try to get Hagrid 
fired.” 

“Well,” said Malfoy, lowering his voice to a whisper, 

“ partly , Potter. But there are other benefits too. 
Weasley, slice my caterpillars for me.” 

A few cauldrons away, Neville was in trouble. Neville 
regularly went to pieces in Potions lessons; it was his 
worst subject, and his great fear of Professor Snape 
made things ten times worse. His potion, which was 
supposed to be a bright, acid green, had turned — 

“Orange, Longbottom,” said Snape, ladling some up 
and allowing it to splash back into the cauldron, so 
that everyone could see. “Orange. Tell me, boy, does 
anything penetrate that thick skull of yours? Didn’t 
you hear me say, quite clearly, that only one rat 
spleen was needed? Didn’t I state plainly that a dash 
of leech juice would suffice? What do I have to do to 
make you understand, Longbottom?” 

Neville was pink and trembling. He looked as though 
he was on the verge of tears. 

“Please, sir,” said Hermione, “please, I could help 
Neville put it right — ” 

“I don’t remember asking you to show off, Miss 
Granger,” said Snape coldly, and Hermione went as 
pink as Neville. “Longbottom, at the end of this lesson 
we will feed a few drops of this potion to your toad 
and see what happens. Perhaps that will encourage 
you to do it properly.” 

Snape moved away, leaving Neville breathless with 
fear. 

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Help me!” he moaned to Hermione. 



“Hey, Harry,” said Seamus Finnigan, leaning over to 
borrow Harry’s brass scales, “have you heard? Daily 
Prophet this morning — they reckon Sirius Black’s 
been sighted.” 

“Where?” said Harry and Ron quickly. On the other 
side of the table, Malfoy looked up, listening closely. 

“Not too far from here,” said Seamus, who looked 
excited. “It was a Muggle who saw him. ’Course, she 
didn’t really understand. The Muggles think he’s just 
an ordinary criminal, don’t they? So she phoned the 
telephone hot line. By the time the Ministry of Magic 
got there, he was gone.” 

“Not too far from here ... ,” Ron repeated, looking 
significantly at Harry. He turned around and saw 
Malfoy watching closely. “What, Malfoy? Need 
something else skinned?” 

But Malfoy’s eyes were shining malevolently, and they 
were fixed on Harry. He leaned across the table. 

“Thinking of trying to catch Black single-handed, 
Potter?” 

“Yeah, that’s right,” said Harry offhandedly. 

Malfoy’s thin mouth was curving in a mean smile. 

“Of course, if it was me,” he said quietly, “I’d have 
done something before now. I wouldn’t be staying in 
school like a good boy, I’d be out there looking for 
him.” 

“What are you talking about, Malfoy?” said Ron 
roughly. 

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t you know, Potter?” breathed Malfoy, his pale 
eyes narrowed. 



“Know what?” 

Malfoy let out a low, sneering laugh. 

“Maybe you’d rather not risk your neck,” he said. 
“Want to leave it to the dementors, do you? But if it 
was me, I’d want revenge. I’d hunt him down myself.” 

“ What are you talking about?” said Harry angrily, but 
at that moment Snape called, “You should have 
finished adding your ingredients by now; this potion 
needs to stew before it can be drunk, so clear away 
while it simmers and then we’ll test Longbottom’s. ...” 

Crabbe and Goyle laughed openly, watching Neville 
sweat as he stirred his potion feverishly. Hermione 
was muttering instructions to him out of the corner of 
her mouth, so that Snape wouldn’t see. Harry and 
Ron packed away their unused ingredients and went 
to wash their hands and ladles in the stone basin in 
the corner. 

“What did Malfoy mean?” Harry muttered to Ron as 
he stuck his hands under the icy jet that poured from 
the gargoyle’s mouth. “Why would I want revenge on 
Black? He hasn’t done anything to me — yet.” 

“He’s making it up,” said Ron savagely. “He’s trying to 
make you do something stupid. ...” 

The end of the lesson in sight, Snape strode over to 
Neville, who was cowering by his cauldron. 

“Everyone gather ’round,” said Snape, his black eyes 
glittering, “and watch what happens to Longbottom’s 
toad. If he has managed to produce a Shrinking 

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Solution, it will shrink to a tadpole. If, as I don’t 
doubt, he has done it wrong, his toad is likely to be 
poisoned.” 

The Gryffindors watched fearfully. The Slytherins 
looked excited. Snape picked up Trevor the toad in 
his left hand and dipped a small spoon into Neville’s 
potion, which was now green. He trickled a few drops 
down Trevor’s throat. 

There was a moment of hushed silence, in which 
Trevor gulped; then there was a small pop, and Trevor 
the tadpole was wriggling in Snape ’s palm. 

The Gryffindors burst into applause. Snape, looking 
sour, pulled a small bottle from the pocket of his 
robe, poured a few drops on top of Trevor, and he 
reappeared suddenly, fully grown. 

“Five points from Gryffindor,” said Snape, which 
wiped the smiles from every face. “I told you not to 
help him, Miss Granger. Class dismissed.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed the steps to the 
entrance hall. Harry was still thinking about what 
Malfoy had said, while Ron was seething about 
Snape. 

“Five points from Gryffindor because the potion was 
all right! Why didn’t you lie, Hermione? You should’ve 
said Neville did it all by himself!” 

Hermione didn’t answer. Ron looked around. 

“Where is she?” 

Harry turned too. They were at the top of the steps 
now, watching the rest of the class pass them, 
heading for the Great Hall and lunch. 

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“She was right behind us,” said Ron, frowning. 

Malfoy passed them, walking between Crabbe and 
Goyle. He smirked at Harry and disappeared. 

“There she is,” said Harry. 

Hermione was panting slightly, hurrying up the 
stairs; one hand clutched her bag, the other seemed 
to be tucking something down the front of her robes. 

“How did you do that?” said Ron. 

“What?” said Hermione, joining them. 

“One minute you were right behind us, the next 
moment, you were back at the bottom of the stairs 
again.” 

“What?” Hermione looked slightly confused. “Oh — I 
had to go back for something. Oh no — ” 

A seam had split on Hermione’s bag. Harry wasn’t 
surprised; he could see that it was crammed with at 
least a dozen large and heavy books. 

“Why are you carrying all these around with you?” 
Ron asked her. 

“You know how many subjects I’m taking,” said 
Hermione breathlessly. “Couldn’t hold these for me, 
could you?” 

“But — ” Ron was turning over the books she had 
handed him, looking at the covers. “You haven’t got 
any of these subjects today. It’s only Defense Against 
the Dark Arts this afternoon.” 



Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh yes,” said Hermione vaguely, but she packed all 
the books back into her bag just the same. “I hope 
there’s something good for lunch, I’m starving,” she 
added, and she marched off toward the Great Hall. 

“D’you get the feeling Hermione ’s not telling us 
something?” Ron asked Harry. 



Professor Lupin wasn’t there when they arrived at his 
first Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson. They all 
sat down, took out their books, quills, and 
parchment, and were talking when he finally entered 
the room. Lupin smiled vaguely and placed his tatty 
old briefcase on the teacher’s desk. He was as shabby 
as ever but looked healthier than he had on the train, 
as though he had had a few square meals. 

“Good afternoon,” he said. “Would you please put all 
your books back in your bags. Today’s will be a 
practical lesson. You will need only your wands.” 

A few curious looks were exchanged as the class put 
away their books. They had never had a practical 
Defense Against the Dark Arts before, unless you 
counted the memorable class last year when their old 
teacher had brought a cageful of pixies to class and 
set them loose. 

“Right then,” said Professor Lupin, when everyone 
was ready. “If you’d follow me.” 

Puzzled but interested, the class got to its feet and 
followed Professor Lupin out of the classroom. He led 
them along the deserted corridor and around a 
corner, where the first thing they saw was Peeves the 
Poltergeist, who was floating upside down in midair 
and stuffing the nearest keyhole with chewing gum. 
Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Peeves didn’t look up until Professor Lupin was two 
feet away; then he wiggled his curly-toed feet and 
broke into song. 

“Loony, loopy Lupin,” Peeves sang. “Loony, loopy 
Lupin, loony, loopy Lupin — ” 

Rude and unmanageable as he almost always was, 
Peeves usually showed some respect toward the 
teachers. Everyone looked quickly at Professor Lupin 
to see how he would take this; to their surprise, he 
was still smiling. 

“I’d take that gum out of the keyhole if I were you, 
Peeves,” he said pleasantly. “Mr. Filch won’t be able to 
get in to his brooms.” 

Filch was the Hogwarts caretaker, a bad-tempered, 
failed wizard who waged a constant war against the 
students and, indeed, Peeves. However, Peeves paid 
no attention to Professor Lupin’s words, except to 
blow a loud wet raspberry. 

Professor Lupin gave a small sigh and took out his 
wand. 

“This is a useful little spell,” he told the class over his 
shoulder. “Please watch closely.” 

He raised the wand to shoulder height, said, 

“ Waddiwasil ” and pointed it at Peeves. 

With the force of a bullet, the wad of chewing gum 
shot out of the keyhole and straight down Peeves ’s left 
nostril; he whirled upright and zoomed away, cursing. 

“Cool, sir!” said Dean Thomas in amazement. 



Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Thank you, Dean,” said Professor Lupin, putting his 
wand away again. “Shall we proceed?” 

They set off again, the class looking at shabby 
Professor Lupin with increased respect. He led them 
down a second corridor and stopped, right outside the 
staffroom door. 

“Inside, please,” said Professor Lupin, opening it and 
standing back. 

The staffroom, a long, paneled room full of old, 
mismatched chairs, was empty except for one teacher. 
Professor Snape was sitting in a low armchair, and he 
looked around as the class filed in. His eyes were 
glittering and there was a nasty sneer playing around 
his mouth. As Professor Lupin came in and made to 
close the door behind him, Snape said, “Leave it open, 
Lupin. Td rather not witness this.” 

He got to his feet and strode past the class, his black 
robes billowing behind him. At the doorway he turned 
on his heel and said, “Possibly no one’s warned you, 
Lupin, but this class contains Neville Longbottom. I 
would advise you not to entrust him with anything 
difficult. Not unless Miss Granger is hissing 
instructions in his ear.” 

Neville went scarlet. Harry glared at Snape; it was bad 
enough that he bullied Neville in his own classes, let 
alone doing it in front of other teachers. 

Professor Lupin had raised his eyebrows. 

“I was hoping that Neville would assist me with the 
first stage of the operation,” he said, “and I am sure 
he will perform it admirably.” 



Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Neville’s face went, if possible, even redder. Snape’s 
lip curled, but he left, shutting the door with a snap. 

“Now, then,” said Professor Lupin, beckoning the 
class toward the end of the room, where there was 
nothing but an old wardrobe where the teachers kept 
their spare robes. As Professor Lupin went to stand 
next to it, the wardrobe gave a sudden wobble, 
banging off the wall. 

“Nothing to worry about,” said Professor Lupin calmly 
because a few people had jumped backward in alarm. 
“There’s a boggart in there.” 

Most people seemed to feel that this was something to 
worry about. Neville gave Professor Lupin a look of 
pure terror, and Seamus Finnigan eyed the now 
rattling doorknob apprehensively. 

“Boggarts like dark, enclosed spaces,” said Professor 
Lupin. “Wardrobes, the gap beneath beds, the 
cupboards under sinks — I’ve even met one that had 
lodged itself in a grandfather clock. This one moved in 
yesterday afternoon, and I asked the headmaster if 
the staff would leave it to give my third years some 
practice. 

“So, the first question we must ask ourselves is, what 
is a boggart?” 

Hermione put up her hand. 

“It’s a shape-shifter,” she said. “It can take the shape 
of whatever it thinks will frighten us most.” 

“Couldn’t have put it better myself,” said Professor 
Lupin, and Hermione glowed. “So the boggart sitting 
in the darkness within has not yet assumed a form. 

He does not yet know what will frighten the person on 

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the other side of the door. Nobody knows what a 
boggart looks like when he is alone, but when I let 
him out, he will immediately become whatever each of 
us most fears. 

“This means,” said Professor Lupin, choosing to 
ignore Neville’s small sputter of terror, “that we have a 
huge advantage over the boggart before we begin. 

Have you spotted it, Harry?” 

Trying to answer a question with Hermione next to 
him, bobbing up and down on the balls of her feet 
with her hand in the air, was very off-putting, but 
Harry had a go. 

“Er — because there are so many of us, it won’t know 
what shape it should be?” 

“Precisely,” said Professor Lupin, and Hermione put 
her hand down, looking a little disappointed. “It’s 
always best to have company when you’re dealing 
with a boggart. He becomes confused. Which should 
he become, a headless corpse or a flesh-eating slug? I 
once saw a boggart make that very mistake — tried to 
frighten two people at once and turned himself into 
half a slug. Not remotely frightening. 

“The charm that repels a boggart is simple, yet it 
requires force of mind. You see, the thing that really 
finishes a boggart is laughter. What you need to do is 
force it to assume a shape that you find amusing. 

“We will practice the charm without wands first. After 
me, please ... riddikulusV’ 

“ RiddikulusV’ said the class together. 

“Good,” said Professor Lupin. “Very good. But that 
was the easy part, I’m afraid. You see, the word alone 

Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




is not enough. And this is where you come in, 
Neville.” 



The wardrobe shook again, though not as much as 
Neville, who walked forward as though he were 
heading for the gallows. 

“Right, Neville,” said Professor Lupin. “First things 
first: what would you say is the thing that frightens 
you most in the world?” 

Neville’s lips moved, but no noise came out. 

“Didn’t catch that, Neville, sorry,” said Professor 
Lupin cheerfully. 

Neville looked around rather wildly, as though 
begging someone to help him, then said, in barely 
more than a whisper, “Professor Snape.” 

Nearly everyone laughed. Even Neville grinned 
apologetically. Professor Lupin, however, looked 
thoughtful. 

“Professor Snape ... hmmm ... Neville, I believe you 
live with your grandmother?” 

“Er — yes,” said Neville nervously. “But — I don’t 
want the boggart to turn into her either.” 

“No, no, you misunderstand me,” said Professor 
Lupin, now smiling. “I wonder, could you tell us what 
sort of clothes your grandmother usually wears?” 

Neville looked startled, but said, “Well ... always the 
same hat. A tall one with a stuffed vulture on top. 

And a long dress ... green, normally ... and sometimes 
a fox-fur scarf.” 

Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And a handbag?” prompted Professor Lupin. 

“A big red one,” said Neville. 

“Right then,” said Professor Lupin. “Can you picture 
those clothes very clearly, Neville? Can you see them 
in your mind’s eye?” 

“Yes,” said Neville uncertainly, plainly wondering 
what was coming next. 

“When the boggart bursts out of this wardrobe, 

Neville, and sees you, it will assume the form of 
Professor Snape,” said Lupin. “And you will raise your 
wand — thus — and cry ‘Riddikulus’ — and 
concentrate hard on your grandmother’s clothes. If all 
goes well, Professor Boggart Snape will be forced into 
that vulture-topped hat, and that green dress, with 
that big red handbag.” 

There was a great shout of laughter. The wardrobe 
wobbled more violently. 

“If Neville is successful, the boggart is likely to shift 
his attention to each of us in turn,” said Professor 
Lupin. “I would like all of you to take a moment now 
to think of the thing that scares you most, and 
imagine how you might force it to look comical. ...” 

The room went quiet. Harry thought ... What scared 
him most in the world? 

His first thought was Lord Voldemort — a Voldemort 
returned to full strength. But before he had even 
started to plan a possible counterattack on a boggart - 
Voldemort, a horrible image came floating to the 
surface of his mind. ... 



Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A rotting, glistening hand, slithering back beneath a 
black cloak ... a long, rattling breath from an unseen 
mouth . . . then a cold so penetrating it felt like 
drowning. ... 

Harry shivered, then looked around, hoping no one 
had noticed. Many people had their eyes shut tight. 
Ron was muttering to himself, “Take its legs off.” 
Harry was sure he knew what that was about. Ron’s 
greatest fear was spiders. 

“Everyone ready?” said Professor Lupin. 

Harry felt a lurch of fear. He wasn’t ready. How could 
you make a dementor less frightening? But he didn’t 
want to ask for more time; everyone else was nodding 
and rolling up their sleeves. 

“Neville, we’re going to back away,” said Professor 
Lupin. “Let you have a clear field, all right? I’ll call the 
next person forward. ... Everyone back, now, so 
Neville can get a clear shot — ” 

They all retreated, backed against the walls, leaving 
Neville alone beside the wardrobe. He looked pale and 
frightened, but he had pushed up the sleeves of his 
robes and was holding his wand ready. 

“On the count of three, Neville,” said Professor Lupin, 
who was pointing his own wand at the handle of the 
wardrobe. “One — two — three — now\” 

A jet of sparks shot from the end of Professor Lupin’s 
wand and hit the doorknob. The wardrobe burst 
open. Hook-nosed and menacing, Professor Snape 
stepped out, his eyes flashing at Neville. 



Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Neville backed away, his wand up, mouthing 
wordlessly. Snape was bearing down upon him, 
reaching inside his robes. 

“R — r — riddikulusV’ squeaked Neville. 

There was a noise like a whip crack. Snape stumbled; 
he was wearing a long, lace-trimmed dress and a 
towering hat topped with a moth-eaten vulture, and 
he was swinging a huge crimson handbag. 

There was a roar of laughter; the boggart paused, 
confused, and Professor Lupin shouted, “Parvati! 
Forward!” 

Parvati walked forward, her face set. Snape rounded 
on her. There was another crack, and where he had 
stood was a bloodstained, bandaged mummy; its 
sightless face was turned to Parvati and it began to 
walk toward her very slowly, dragging its feet, its stiff 
arms rising — 

“RiddikulusV’ cried Parvati. 

A bandage unraveled at the mummy’s feet; it became 
entangled, fell face forward, and its head rolled off. 

“Seamus!” roared Professor Lupin. 

Seamus darted past Parvati. 

Crack ! Where the mummy had been was a woman 
with floor-length black hair and a skeletal, green- 
tinged face — a banshee. She opened her mouth wide 
and an unearthly sound filled the room, a long, 
wailing shriek that made the hair on Harry’s head 
stand on end — 

“RiddikulusV’ shouted Seamus. 

Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The banshee made a rasping noise and clutched her 
throat; her voice was gone. 

Crack). The banshee turned into a rat, which chased 
its tail in a circle, then — crack). — became a 
rattlesnake, which slithered and writhed before — 
crack ! — becoming a single, bloody eyeball. 

“It’s confused!” shouted Lupin. “We’re getting there! 
Dean!” 

Dean hurried forward. 

Crack) The eyeball became a severed hand, which 
flipped over and began to creep along the floor like a 
crab. 

“RiddikulusV’ yelled Dean. 

There was a snap, and the hand was trapped in a 
mousetrap. 

“Excellent! Ron, you next!” 

Ron leapt forward. 

Crack) 

Quite a few people screamed. A giant spider, six feet 
tall and covered in hair, was advancing on Ron, 
clicking its pincers menacingly. For a moment, Harry 
thought Ron had frozen. Then — 

“RiddikulusV’ bellowed Ron, and the spider’s legs 
vanished; it rolled over and over; Lavender Brown 
squealed and ran out of its way and it came to a halt 
at Harry’s feet. He raised his wand, ready, but — 



Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Here!” shouted Professor Lupin suddenly, hurrying 
forward. 

Crack). 

The legless spider had vanished. For a second, 
everyone looked wildly around to see where it was. 
Then they saw a silvery-white orb hanging in the air 
in front of Lupin, who said, “RiddikulusV’ almost 
lazily. 

Crack ! 

“Forward, Neville, and finish him off!” said Lupin as 
the boggart landed on the floor as a cockroach. Crack). 
Snape was back. This time Neville charged forward 
looking determined. 

“RiddikulusV’ he shouted, and they had a split 
second’s view of Snape in his lacy dress before Neville 
let out a great “Ha!” of laughter, and the boggart 
exploded, burst into a thousand tiny wisps of smoke, 
and was gone. 

“Excellent!” cried Professor Lupin as the class broke 
into applause. “Excellent, Neville. Well done, 
everyone. ... Let me see ... five points to Gryffindor for 
every person to tackle the boggart — ten for Neville 
because he did it twice . . . and five each to Hermione 
and Harry.” 

“But I didn’t do anything,” said Harry. 

“You and Hermione answered my questions correctly 
at the start of the class, Harry,” Lupin said lightly. 
“Very well, everyone, an excellent lesson. Homework, 
kindly read the chapter on boggarts and summarize it 
for me ... to be handed in on Monday. That will be 
all.” 

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Talking excitedly, the class left the staffroom. Harry, 
however, wasn’t feeling cheerful. Professor Lupin had 
deliberately stopped him from tackling the boggart. 
Why? Was it because he’d seen Harry collapse on the 
train, and thought he wasn’t up to much? Had he 
thought Harry would pass out again? 

But no one else seemed to have noticed anything. 

“Did you see me take that banshee?” shouted 
Seamus. 

“And the hand!” said Dean, waving his own around. 
“And Snape in that hat!” 

“And my mummy!” 

“I wonder why Professor Lupin’s frightened of crystal 
balls?” said Lavender thoughtfully. 

“That was the best Defense Against the Dark Arts 
lesson we’ve ever had, wasn’t it?” said Ron excitedly 
as they made their way back to the classroom to get 
their bags. 

“He seems like a very good teacher,” said Hermione 
approvingly. “But I wish I could have had a turn with 
the boggart — ” 

“What would it have been for you?” said Ron, 
sniggering. “A piece of homework that only got nine 
out of ten?” 



Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




d 




FLIGHT OF THE FAT LADY 

In no time at all, Defense Against the Dark Arts had 
become most people’s favorite class. Only Draco 
Malfoy and his gang of Slytherins had anything bad to 
say about Professor Lupin. 

“Look at the state of his robes,” Malfoy would say in a 
loud whisper as Professor Lupin passed. “He dresses 
like our old house-elf.” 

But no one else cared that Professor Lupin’s robes 
were patched and frayed. His next few lessons were 
just as interesting as the first. After boggarts, they 
studied Red Caps, nasty little goblinlike creatures 
that lurked wherever there had been bloodshed: in 
the dungeons of castles and the potholes of deserted 
battlefields, waiting to bludgeon those who had gotten 
lost. From Red Caps they moved on to kappas, creepy 
water-dwellers that looked like scaly monkeys, with 
webbed hands itching to strangle unwitting waders in 
their ponds. 

Harry only wished he was as happy with some of his 
other classes. Worst of all was Potions. Snape was in 

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



a particularly vindictive mood these days, and no one 
was in any doubt why. The story of the boggart 
assuming Snape’s shape, and the way that Neville 
had dressed it in his grandmother’s clothes, had 
traveled through the school like wildfire. Snape didn’t 
seem to find it funny. His eyes flashed menacingly at 
the very mention of Professor Lupin’s name, and he 
was bullying Neville worse than ever. 

Harry was also growing to dread the hours he spent 
in Professor Trelawney’s stifling tower room, 
deciphering lopsided shapes and symbols, trying to 
ignore the way Professor Trelawney’s enormous eyes 
filled with tears every time she looked at him. He 
couldn’t like Professor Trelawney, even though she 
was treated with respect bordering on reverence by 
many of the class. Parvati Patil and Lavender Brown 
had taken to haunting Professor Trelawney’s tower 
room at lunchtimes, and always returned with 
annoyingly superior looks on their faces, as though 
they knew things the others didn’t. They had also 
started using hushed voices whenever they spoke to 
Harry, as though he were on his deathbed. 

Nobody really liked Care of Magical Creatures, which, 
after the action-packed first class, had become 
extremely dull. Hagrid seemed to have lost his 
confidence. They were now spending lesson after 
lesson learning how to look after flobberworms, which 
had to be some of the most boring creatures in 
existence. 

“Why would anyone bother looking after them?” said 
Ron, after yet another hour of poking shredded 
lettuce down the flobberworms’ slimy throats. 

At the start of October, however, Harry had 
something else to occupy him, something so enjoyable 
it more than made up for his unsatisfactory classes. 

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Quidditch season was approaching, and Oliver 
Wood, Captain of the Gryffindor team, called a 
meeting one Thursday evening to discuss tactics for 
the new season. 

There were seven people on a Quidditch team: three 
Chasers, whose job it was to score goals by putting 
the Quaffle (a red, soccer-sized ball) through one of 
the fifty-foot-high hoops at each end of the field; two 
Beaters, who were equipped with heavy bats to repel 
the Bludgers (two heavy black balls that zoomed 
around trying to attack the players); a Keeper, who 
defended the goal posts, and the Seeker, who had the 
hardest job of all, that of catching the Golden Snitch, 
a tiny, winged, walnut-sized ball, whose capture 
ended the game and earned the Seeker’s team an 
extra one hundred and fifty points. 

Oliver Wood was a burly seventeen-year-old, now in 
his seventh and final year at Hogwarts. There was a 
quiet sort of desperation in his voice as he addressed 
his six fellow team members in the chilly locker rooms 
on the edge of the darkening Quidditch field. 

“This is our last chance — my last chance — to win 
the Quidditch Cup,” he told them, striding up and 
down in front of them. “I’ll be leaving at the end of 
this year. I’ll never get another shot at it. 

“Gryffindor hasn’t won for seven years now. Okay, so 
we’ve had the worst luck in the world — injuries — 
then the tournament getting called off last year. ...” 
Wood swallowed, as though the memory still brought 
a lump to his throat. “But we also know we’ve got the 
best — ruddy — team — in — the — school,” he said, 
punching a fist into his other hand, the old manic 
glint back in his eye. 

“We’ve got three superb Chasers.” 

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Wood pointed at Alicia Spinnet, Angelina Johnson, 
and Katie Bell. 

“We’ve got two unbeatable Beaters.” 

“Stop it, Oliver, you’re embarrassing us,” said Fred 
and George Weasley together, pretending to blush. 

“And we’ve got a Seeker who has never failed to win 
us a match).” Wood rumbled, glaring at Harry with a 
kind of furious pride. “And me,” he added as an 
afterthought. 

“We think you’re very good too, Oliver,” said George. 

“Spanking good Keeper,” said Fred. 

“The point is,” Wood went on, resuming his pacing, 
“the Quidditch Cup should have had our name on it 
these last two years. Ever since Harry joined the 
team, I’ve thought the thing was in the bag. But we 
haven’t got it, and this year’s the last chance we’ll get 
to finally see our name on the thing. ...” 

Wood spoke so dejectedly that even Fred and George 
looked sympathetic. 

“Oliver, this year’s our year,” said Fred. 

“Well do it, Oliver!” said Angelina. 

“Definitely,” said Harry. 

Full of determination, the team started training 
sessions, three evenings a week. The weather was 
getting colder and wetter, the nights darker, but no 
amount of mud, wind, or rain could tarnish Harry’s 
wonderful vision of finally winning the huge, silver 
Quidditch Cup. 

Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry returned to the Gryffindor common room one 
evening after training, cold and stiff but pleased with 
the way practice had gone, to find the room buzzing 
excitedly. 

“What’s happened?” he asked Ron and Hermione, 
who were sitting in two of the best chairs by the 
fireside and completing some star charts for 
Astronomy. 

“First Hogsmeade weekend,” said Ron, pointing at a 
notice that had appeared on the battered old bulletin 
board. “End of October. Halloween.” 

“Excellent,” said Fred, who had followed Harry 
through the portrait hole. “I need to visit Zonko’s. I’m 
nearly out of Stink Pellets.” 

Harry threw himself into a chair beside Ron, his high 
spirits ebbing away. Hermione seemed to read his 
mind. 

“Harry, I’m sure you’ll be able to go next time,” she 
said. “They’re bound to catch Black soon. He’s been 
sighted once already” 

“Black’s not fool enough to try anything in 
Hogsmeade,” said Ron. “Ask McGonagall if you can go 
this time, Harry. The next one might not be for ages 



“Ron\” said Hermione. “Harry’s supposed to stay in 
school — ” 

“He can’t be the only third year left behind,” said Ron. 
“Ask McGonagall, go on, Harry — ” 

“Yeah, I think I will,” said Harry, making up his mind. 



Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione opened her mouth to argue, but at that 
moment Crookshanks leapt lightly onto her lap. A 
large, dead spider was dangling from his mouth. 

“Does he have to eat that in front of us?” said Ron, 
scowling. 

“Clever Crookshanks, did you catch that all by 
yourself?” said Hermione. 

Crookshanks slowly chewed up the spider, his yellow 
eyes fixed insolently on Ron. 

“Just keep him over there, that’s all,” said Ron 
irritably, turning back to his star chart. “I’ve got 
Scabbers asleep in my bag.” 

Harry yawned. He really wanted to go to bed, but he 
still had his own star chart to complete. He pulled his 
bag toward him, took out parchment, ink, and quill, 
and started work. 

“You can copy mine, if you like,” said Ron, labeling 
his last star with a flourish and shoving the chart 
toward Harry. 

Hermione, who disapproved of copying, pursed her 
lips but didn’t say anything. Crookshanks was still 
staring unblinkingly at Ron, flicking the end of his 
bushy tail. Then, without warning, he pounced. 

“OY!” Ron roared, seizing his bag as Crookshanks 
sank four sets of claws deep inside it and began 
tearing ferociously. “GET OFF, YOU STUPID ANIMAL!” 

Ron tried to pull the bag away from Crookshanks, but 
Crookshanks clung on, spitting and slashing. 



Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron, don’t hurt him!” squealed Hermione; the whole 
common room was watching; Ron whirled the bag 
around, Crookshanks still clinging to it, and Scabbers 
came flying out of the top — 

“CATCH THAT CAT!” Ron yelled as Crookshanks freed 
himself from the remnants of the bag, sprang over the 
table, and chased after the terrified Scabbers. 

George Weasley made a lunge for Crookshanks but 
missed; Scabbers streaked through twenty pairs of 
legs and shot beneath an old chest of drawers. 
Crookshanks skidded to a halt, crouched low on his 
bandy legs, and started making furious swipes 
beneath it with his front paw. 

Ron and Hermione hurried over; Hermione grabbed 
Crookshanks around the middle and heaved him 
away; Ron threw himself onto his stomach and, with 
great difficulty, pulled Scabbers out by the tail. 

“Look at him!” he said furiously to Hermione, 
dangling Scabbers in front of her. “He’s skin and 
bone! You keep that cat away from him!” 

“Crookshanks doesn’t understand it’s wrong!” said 
Hermione, her voice shaking. “All cats chase rats, 
Ron!” 

“There’s something funny about that animal!” said 
Ron, who was trying to persuade a frantically wiggling 
Scabbers back into his pocket. “It heard me say that 
Scabbers was in my bag!” 

“Oh, what rubbish,” said Hermione impatiently. 
“Crookshanks could smell him, Ron, how else d’you 
think — ” 



Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“That cat’s got it in for Scabbers!” said Ron, ignoring 
the people around him, who were starting to giggle. 
“And Scabbers was here first, and he’s ill!” 

Ron marched through the common room and out of 
sight up the stairs to the boys’ dormitories. 

Ron was still in a bad mood with Hermione next day. 
He barely talked to her all through Herbology, even 
though he, Harry, and Hermione were working 
together on the same puffapod. 

“How’s Scabbers?” Hermione asked timidly as they 
stripped fat pink pods from the plants and emptied 
the shining beans into a wooden pail. 

“He’s hiding at the bottom of my bed, shaking,” said 
Ron angrily, missing the pail and scattering beans 
over the greenhouse floor. 

“Careful, Weasley, careful!” cried Professor Sprout as 
the beans burst into bloom before their very eyes. 

They had Transfiguration next. Harry, who had 
resolved to ask Professor McGonagall after the lesson 
whether he could go into Hogsmeade with the rest, 
joined the line outside the class trying to decide how 
he was going to argue his case. He was distracted, 
however, by a disturbance at the front of the line. 

Lavender Brown seemed to be crying. Parvati had her 
arm around her and was explaining something to 
Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, who were 
looking very serious. 

“What’s the matter, Lavender?” said Hermione 
anxiously as she, Harry, and Ron went to join the 
group. 



Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“She got a letter from home this morning,” Parvati 
whispered. “It’s her rabbit, Binky. He’s been killed by 
a fox.” 

“Oh,” said Hermione, “I’m sorry, Lavender.” 

“I should have known!” said Lavender tragically. “You 
know what day it is?” 

“Er — ” 



“The sixteenth of October! That thing you’re dreading, 
it will happen on the sixteenth of October!’ 
Remember? She was right, she was right!” 

The whole class was gathered around Lavender now. 
Seamus shook his head seriously. Hermione 
hesitated; then she said, “You — you were dreading 
Binky being killed by a fox?” 

“Well, not necessarily by a fox,” said Lavender, 
looking up at Hermione with streaming eyes, “but I 
was obviously dreading him dying, wasn’t I?” 

“Oh,” said Hermione. She paused again. Then — 

“Was Binky an old rabbit?” 

“N — no!” sobbed Lavender. “H — he was only a 
baby!” 

Parvati tightened her arm around Lavender’s 
shoulders. 

“But then, why would you dread him dying?” said 
Hermione. 

Parvati glared at her. 



Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, look at it logically,” said Hermione, turning to 
the rest of the group. “I mean, Binky didn’t even die 
today, did he? Lavender just got the news today — ” 
Lavender wailed loudly. “ — and she can’t have been 
dreading it, because it’s come as a real shock — ” 

“Don’t mind Hermione, Lavender,” said Ron loudly, 
“she doesn’t think other people’s pets matter very 
much.” 

Professor McGonagall opened the classroom door at 
that moment, which was perhaps lucky; Hermione 
and Ron were looking daggers at each other, and 
when they got into class, they seated themselves on 
either side of Harry and didn’t talk to each other for 
the whole class. 

Harry still hadn’t decided what he was going to say to 
Professor McGonagall when the bell rang at the end of 
the lesson, but it was she who brought up the subject 
of Hogsmeade first. 

“One moment, please!” she called as the class made 
to leave. “As you’re all in my House, you should hand 
Hogsmeade permission forms to me before Halloween. 
No form, no visiting the village, so don’t forget!” 

Neville put up his hand. 

“Please, Professor, I — I think I’ve lost — ” 

“Your grandmother sent yours to me directly, 
Longbottom,” said Professor McGonagall. “She 
seemed to think it was safer. Well, that’s all, you may 
leave.” 

“Ask her now,” Ron hissed at Harry. 

“Oh, but — ” Hermione began. 

Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Go for it, Harry,” said Ron stubbornly. 

Harry waited for the rest of the class to disappear, 
then headed nervously for Professor McGonagall’s 
desk. 

“Yes, Potter?” 

Harry took a deep breath. 

“Professor, my aunt and uncle — er — forgot to sign 
my form,” he said. 

Professor McGonagall looked over her square 
spectacles at him but didn’t say anything. 

“So — er — d’you think it would be all right — I 
mean, will it be okay if I — if I go to Hogsmeade?” 

Professor McGonagall looked down and began 
shuffling papers on her desk. 

“I’m afraid not, Potter,” she said. “You heard what I 
said. No form, no visiting the village. That’s the rule.” 

“But — Professor, my aunt and uncle — you know, 
they’re Muggles, they don’t really understand about 
— about Hogwarts forms and stuff,” Harry said, while 
Ron egged him on with vigorous nods. “If you said I 
could go — ” 

“But I don’t say so,” said Professor McGonagall, 
standing up and piling her papers neatly into a 
drawer. “The form clearly states that the parent or 
guardian must give permission.” She turned to look at 
him, with an odd expression on her face. Was it pity? 
“I’m sorry, Potter, but that’s my final word. You had 
better hurry, or you’ll be late for your next lesson.” 



Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was nothing to be done. Ron called Professor 
McGonagall a lot of names that greatly annoyed 
Hermione; Hermione assumed an “all-for-the-best” 
expression that made Ron even angrier, and Harry 
had to endure everyone in the class talking loudly 
and happily about what they were going to do first, 
once they got into Hogsmeade. 

“There’s always the feast,” said Ron, in an effort to 
cheer Harry up. “You know, the Halloween feast, in 
the evening.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry gloomily, “great.” 

The Halloween feast was always good, but it would 
taste a lot better if he was coming to it after a day in 
Hogsmeade with everyone else. Nothing anyone said 
made him feel any better about being left behind. 
Dean Thomas, who was good with a quill, had offered 
to forge Uncle Vernon’s signature on the form, but as 
Harry had already told Professor McGonagall he 
hadn’t had it signed, that was no good. Ron 
halfheartedly suggested the Invisibility Cloak, but 
Hermione stamped on that one, reminding Ron what 
Dumbledore had told them about the dementors 
being able to see through them. Percy had what were 
possibly the least helpful words of comfort. 

“They make a fuss about Hogsmeade, but I assure 
you, Harry, it’s not all it’s cracked up to be,” he said 
seriously. “All right, the sweetshop’s rather good, and 
Zonko’s Joke Shop’s frankly dangerous, and yes, the 
Shrieking Shack’s always worth a visit, but really, 
Harry, apart from that, you’re not missing anything.” 

On Halloween morning, Harry awoke with the rest 
and went down to breakfast, feeling thoroughly 
depressed, though doing his best to act normally. 



Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well bring you lots of sweets back from 
Honeydukes,” said Hermione, looking desperately 
sorry for him. 

“Yeah, loads,” said Ron. He and Hermione had finally 
forgotten their squabble about Crookshanks in the 
face of Harry’s difficulties. 

“Don’t worry about me,” said Harry, in what he hoped 
was an offhand voice, “I’ll see you at the feast. Have a 
good time.” 

He accompanied them to the entrance hall, where 
Filch, the caretaker, was standing inside the front 
doors, checking off names against a long list, peering 
suspiciously into every face, and making sure that no 
one was sneaking out who shouldn’t be going. 

“Staying here, Potter?” shouted Malfoy, who was 
standing in line with Crabbe and Goyle. “Scared of 
passing the dementors?” 

Harry ignored him and made his solitary way up the 
marble staircase, through the deserted corridors, and 
back to Gryffindor Tower. 

“Password?” said the Fat Lady, jerking out of a doze. 

“Fortuna Major,” said Harry listlessly. 

The portrait swung open and he climbed through the 
hole into the common room. It was full of chattering 
first and second years, and a few older students, who 
had obviously visited Hogsmeade so often the novelty 
had worn off. 

“Harry! Harry! Hi, Harry!” 



Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It was Colin Creevey, a second year who was deeply in 
awe of Harry and never missed an opportunity to 
speak to him. 

“Aren’t you going to Hogsmeade, Harry? Why not? 
Hey” — Colin looked eagerly around at his friends — 
“you can come and sit with us, if you like, Harry!” 

“Er — no, thanks, Colin,” said Harry, who wasn’t in 
the mood to have a lot of people staring avidly at the 
scar on his forehead. “I — I’ve got to go to the library, 
got to get some work done.” 

After that, he had no choice but to turn right around 
and head back out of the portrait hole again. 

“What was the point waking me up?” the Fat Lady 
called grumpily after him as he walked away. 

Harry wandered dispiritedly toward the library, but 
halfway there he changed his mind; he didn’t feel like 
working. He turned around and came face-to-face 
with Filch, who had obviously just seen off the last of 
the Hogsmeade visitors. 

“What are you doing?” Filch snarled suspiciously. 

“Nothing,” said Harry truthfully. 

“Nothing!” spat Filch, his jowls quivering 
unpleasantly. “A likely story! Sneaking around on 
your own — why aren’t you in Hogsmeade buying 
Stink Pellets and Belch Powder and Whizzing Worms 
like the rest of your nasty little friends?” 

Harry shrugged. 



Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, get back to your common room where you 
belong!” snapped Filch, and he stood glaring until 
Harry had passed out of sight. 

But Harry didn’t go back to the common room; he 
climbed a staircase, thinking vaguely of visiting the 
Owlery to see Hedwig, and was walking along another 
corridor when a voice from inside one of the rooms 
said, “Harry?” 

Harry doubled back to see who had spoken and met 
Professor Lupin, looking around his office door. 

“What are you doing?” said Lupin, though in a very 
different voice from Filch. “Where are Ron and 
Hermione?” 

“Hogsmeade,” said Harry, in a would-be casual voice. 

“Ah,” said Lupin. He considered Harry for a moment. 
“Why don’t you come in? I’ve just taken delivery of a 
grindylow for our next lesson.” 

“A what?” said Harry. 

He followed Lupin into his office. In the corner stood a 
very large tank of water. A sickly green creature with 
sharp little horns had its face pressed against the 
glass, pulling faces and flexing its long, spindly 
fingers. 

“Water demon,” said Lupin, surveying the grindylow 
thoughtfully. “We shouldn’t have much difficulty with 
him, not after the kappas. The trick is to break his 
grip. You notice the abnormally long fingers? Strong, 
but very brittle.” 

The grindylow bared its green teeth and then buried 
itself in a tangle of weeds in a corner. 

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Cup of tea?” Lupin said, looking around for his 
kettle. “I was just thinking of making one.” 

“All right,” said Harry awkwardly. 

Lupin tapped the kettle with his wand and a blast of 
steam issued suddenly from the spout. 

“Sit down,” said Lupin, taking the lid off a dusty tin. 
“I’ve only got teabags, I’m afraid — but I daresay 
you’ve had enough of tea leaves?” 

Harry looked at him. Lupin’s eyes were twinkling. 

“How did you know about that?” Harry asked. 

“Professor McGonagall told me,” said Lupin, passing 
Harry a chipped mug of tea. “You’re not worried, are 
you?” 

“No,” said Harry. 

He thought for a moment of telling Lupin about the 
dog he’d seen in Magnolia Crescent but decided not 
to. He didn’t want Lupin to think he was a coward, 
especially since Lupin already seemed to think he 
couldn’t cope with a boggart. 

Something of Harry’s thoughts seemed to have shown 
on his face, because Lupin said, “Anything worrying 
you, Harry?” 

“No,” Harry lied. He drank a bit of tea and watched 
the grindylow brandishing a fist at him. “Yes,” he said 
suddenly, putting his tea down on Lupin’s desk. “You 
know that day we fought the boggart? 

“Yes,” said Lupin slowly. 



Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Why didn’t you let me fight it?” said Harry abruptly. 
Lupin raised his eyebrows. 

“I would have thought that was obvious, Harry,” he 
said, sounding surprised. 

Harry, who had expected Lupin to deny that he’d 
done any such thing, was taken aback. 

“Why?” he said again. 

“Well,” said Lupin, frowning slightly, “I assumed that 
if the boggart faced you, it would assume the shape of 
Lord Voldemort.” 

Harry stared. Not only was this the last answer he’d 
expected, but Lupin had said Voldemort ’s name. The 
only person Harry had ever heard say the name aloud 
(apart from himself) was Professor Dumbledore. 

“Clearly, I was wrong,” said Lupin, still frowning at 
Harry. “But I didn’t think it a good idea for Lord 
Voldemort to materialize in the staffroom. I imagined 
that people would panic.” 

“I didn’t think of Voldemort,” said Harry honestly. “I 
— I remembered those dementors.” 

“I see,” said Lupin thoughtfully. “Well, well ... I’m 
impressed.” He smiled slightly at the look of surprise 
on Harry’s face. “That suggests that what you fear 
most of all is — fear. Very wise, Harry.” 

Harry didn’t know what to say to that, so he drank 
some more tea. 

“So you’ve been thinking that I didn’t believe you 
capable of fighting the boggart?” said Lupin shrewdly. 

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well ... yeah,” said Harry. He was suddenly feeling a 
lot happier. “Professor Lupin, you know the 
dementors — ” 

He was interrupted by a knock on the door. 

“Come in,” called Lupin. 

The door opened, and in came Snape. He was 
carrying a goblet, which was smoking faintly, and 
stopped at the sight of Harry, his black eyes 
narrowing. 

“Ah, Severus,” said Lupin, smiling. “Thanks very 
much. Could you leave it here on the desk for me?” 

Snape set down the smoking goblet, his eyes 
wandering between Harry and Lupin. 

“I was just showing Harry my grindylow,” said Lupin 
pleasantly, pointing at the tank. 

“Fascinating,” said Snape, without looking at it. “You 
should drink that directly, Lupin.” 

“Yes, yes, I will,” said Lupin. 

“I made an entire cauldronful,” Snape continued. “If 
you need more.” 

“I should probably take some again tomorrow. Thanks 
very much, Severus.” 

“Not at all,” said Snape, but there was a look in his 
eye Harry didn’t like. He backed out of the room, 
unsmiling and watchful. 

Harry looked curiously at the goblet. Lupin smiled. 



Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor Snape has very kindly concocted a potion 
for me,” he said. “I have never been much of a potion- 
brewer and this one is particularly complex.” He 
picked up the goblet and sniffed it. “Pity sugar makes 
it useless,” he added, taking a sip and shuddering. 

“Why — ?” Harry began. Lupin looked at him and 
answered the unfinished question. 

“I’ve been feeling a bit off-color,” he said. “This potion 
is the only thing that helps. I am very lucky to be 
working alongside Professor Snape; there aren’t many 
wizards who are up to making it.” 

Professor Lupin took another sip and Harry had a 
crazy urge to knock the goblet out of his hands. 

“Professor Snape’s very interested in the Dark Arts,” 
he blurted out. 

“Really?” said Lupin, looking only mildly interested as 
he took another gulp of potion. 

“Some people reckon — ” Harry hesitated, then 
plunged recklessly on, “some people reckon he’d do 
anything to get the Defense Against the Dark Arts 
job.” 

Lupin drained the goblet and pulled a face. 

“Disgusting,” he said. “Well, Harry, I’d better get back 
to work. I’ll see you at the feast later.” 

“Right,” said Harry, putting down his empty teacup. 

The empty goblet was still smoking. 

“There you go,” said Ron. “We got as much as we 
could carry.” 

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A shower of brilliantly colored sweets fell into Harry’s 
lap. It was dusk, and Ron and Hermione had just 
turned up in the common room, pink-faced from the 
cold wind and looking as though they’d had the time 
of their lives. 

“Thanks,” said Harry, picking up a packet of tiny 
black Pepper Imps. “What’s Hogsmeade like? Where 
did you go?” 

By the sound of it — everywhere. Dervish and 
Banges, the wizarding equipment shop, Zonko’s Joke 
Shop, into the Three Broomsticks for foaming mugs of 
hot butterbeer, and many places besides. 

“The post office, Harry! About two hundred owls, all 
sitting on shelves, all color-coded depending on how 
fast you want your letter to get there!” 

“Honeydukes has got a new kind of fudge; they were 
giving out free samples, there’s a bit, look — ” 

“We think we saw an ogre, honestly, they get all sorts 
at the Three Broomsticks — ” 

“Wish we could have brought you some butterbeer, 
really warms you up — ” 

“What did you do?” said Hermione, looking anxious. 
“Did you get any work done?” 

“No,” said Harry. “Lupin made me a cup of tea in his 
office. And then Snape came in. ...” 

He told them all about the goblet. Ron’s mouth fell 
open. 

“ Lupin drank it?” he gasped. “Is he mad?” 



Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione checked her watch. 



“We’d better go down, you know, the feast’ll be 
starting in five minutes. ...” They hurried through the 
portrait hole and into the crowd, still discussing 
Snape. 

“But if he — you know” — Hermione dropped her 
voice, glancing nervously around — “if he was trying 
to — to poison Lupin — he wouldn’t have done it in 
front of Harry.” 

“Yeah, maybe,” said Harry as they reached the 
entrance hall and crossed into the Great Hall. It had 
been decorated with hundreds and hundreds of 
candle-filled pumpkins, a cloud of fluttering live bats, 
and many flaming orange streamers, which were 
swimming lazily across the stormy ceiling like brilliant 
watersnakes. 

The food was delicious; even Hermione and Ron, who 
were full to bursting with Honeydukes sweets, 
managed second helpings of everything. Harry kept 
glancing at the staff table. Professor Lupin looked 
cheerful and as well as he ever did; he was talking 
animatedly to tiny little Professor Flitwick, the 
Charms teacher. Harry moved his eyes along the 
table, to the place where Snape sat. Was he imagining 
it, or were Snape ’s eyes flickering toward Lupin more 
often than was natural? 

The feast finished with an entertainment provided by 
the Hogwarts ghosts. They popped out of the walls 
and tables to do a bit of formation gliding; Nearly 
Headless Nick, the Gryffindor ghost, had a great 
success with a reenactment of his own botched 
beheading. 



Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It had been such a pleasant evening that Harry’s good 
mood couldn’t even be spoiled by Malfoy, who 
shouted through the crowd as they all left the hall, 
“The dementors send their love, Potter!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed the rest of the 
Gryffindors along the usual path to Gryffindor Tower, 
but when they reached the corridor that ended with 
the portrait of the Fat Lady, they found it jammed 
with students. 

“Why isn’t anyone going in?” said Ron curiously. 

Harry peered over the heads in front of him. The 
portrait seemed to be closed. 

“Let me through, please,” came Percy’s voice, and he 
came bustling importantly through the crowd. 

“What’s the holdup here? You can’t all have forgotten 
the password — excuse me, I’m Head Boy — ” 

And then a silence fell over the crowd, from the front 
first, so that a chill seemed to spread down the 
corridor. They heard Percy say, in a suddenly sharp 
voice, “Somebody get Professor Dumbledore. Quick.” 

People’s heads turned; those at the back were 
standing on tiptoe. 

“What’s going on?” said Ginny, who had just arrived. 

A moment later, Professor Dumbledore was there, 
sweeping toward the portrait; the Gryffindors 
squeezed together to let him through, and Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione moved closer to see what the trouble 
was. 

“Oh, my — ” Hermione grabbed Harry’s arm. 



Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Fat Lady had vanished from her portrait, which 
had been slashed so viciously that strips of canvas 
littered the floor; great chunks of it had been torn 
away completely. 

Dumbledore took one quick look at the ruined 
painting and turned, his eyes somber, to see 
Professors McGonagall, Lupin, and Snape hurrying 
toward him. 

“We need to find her,” said Dumbledore. “Professor 
McGonagall, please go to Mr. Filch at once and tell 
him to search every painting in the castle for the Fat 
Lady.” 

“You’ll be lucky!” said a cackling voice. 

It was Peeves the Poltergeist, bobbing over the crowd 
and looking delighted, as he always did, at the sight 
of wreckage or worry. 

“What do you mean, Peeves?” said Dumbledore 
calmly, and Peeves’s grin faded a little. He didn’t dare 
taunt Dumbledore. Instead he adopted an oily voice 
that was no better than his cackle. 

“Ashamed, Your Headship, sir. Doesn’t want to be 
seen. She’s a horrible mess. Saw her running through 
the landscape up on the fourth floor, sir, dodging 
between the trees. Crying something dreadful,” he 
said happily. “Poor thing,” he added unconvincingly. 

“Did she say who did it?” said Dumbledore quietly. 

“Oh yes, Professorhead,” said Peeves, with the air of 
one cradling a large bombshell in his arms. “He got 
very angry when she wouldn’t let him in, you see.” 
Peeves flipped over and grinned at Dumbledore from 



Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




between his own legs. “Nasty temper he’s got, that 
Sirius Black.” 



Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




9 




GRIM DEFEAT 

Professor Dumbledore sent all the Gryffindors back to 
the Great Hall, where they were joined ten minutes 
later by the students from Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and 
Slytherin, who all looked extremely confused. 

“The teachers and I need to conduct a thorough 
search of the castle,” Professor Dumbledore told them 
as Professors McGonagall and Flitwick closed all 
doors into the hall. “I’m afraid that, for your own 
safety, you will have to spend the night here. I want 
the prefects to stand guard over the entrances to the 
hall and I am leaving the Head Boy and Girl in 
charge. Any disturbance should be reported to me 
immediately,” he added to Percy, who was looking 
immensely proud and important. “Send word with one 
of the ghosts.” 

Professor Dumbledore paused, about to leave the hall, 
and said, “Oh, yes, you’ll be needing ...” 

One casual wave of his wand and the long tables flew 
to the edges of the hall and stood themselves against 

Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



the walls; another wave, and the floor was covered 
with hundreds of squashy purple sleeping bags. 

“Sleep well,” said Professor Dumbledore, closing the 
door behind him. 

The hall immediately began to buzz excitedly; the 
Gryffindors were telling the rest of the school what 
had just happened. 

“Everyone into their sleeping bags!” shouted Percy. 
“Come on, now, no more talking! Lights out in ten 
minutes!” 

“C’mon,” Ron said to Harry and Hermione; they seized 
three sleeping bags and dragged them into a corner. 

“Do you think Black’s still in the castle?” Hermione 
whispered anxiously. 

“Dumbledore obviously thinks he might be,” said Ron. 

“It’s very lucky he picked tonight, you know,” said 
Hermione as they climbed fully dressed into their 
sleeping bags and propped themselves on their elbows 
to talk. “The one night we weren’t in the tower. ...” 

“I reckon he’s lost track of time, being on the run,” 
said Ron. “Didn’t realize it was Halloween. Otherwise 
he’d have come bursting in here.” 

Hermione shuddered. 

All around them, people were asking one another the 
same question: “How did he get in?” 

“Maybe he knows how to Apparate,” said a Ravenclaw 
a few feet away. “Just appear out of thin air, you 
know.” 

Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Disguised himself, probably,” said a Hufflepuff fifth 
year. 

“He could’ve flown in,” suggested Dean Thomas. 

“Honestly, am I the only person who’s ever bothered 
to read Hogwarts, A History?” said Hermione crossly 
to Harry and Ron. 

“Probably,” said Ron. “Why?” 

“Because the castle’s protected by more than walls, 
you know,” said Hermione. “There are all sorts of 
enchantments on it, to stop people entering by 
stealth. You can’t just Apparate in here. And I’d like 
to see the disguise that could fool those dementors. 
They’re guarding every single entrance to the 
grounds. They’d have seen him fly in too. And Filch 
knows all the secret passages, they’ll have them 
covered. ...” 

“The lights are going out now!” Percy shouted. “I want 
everyone in their sleeping bags and no more talking!” 

The candles all went out at once. The only light now 
came from the silvery ghosts, who were drifting about 
talking seriously to the prefects, and the enchanted 
ceiling, which, like the sky outside, was scattered 
with stars. What with that, and the whispering that 
still filled the hall, Harry felt as though he were 
sleeping outdoors in a light wind. 

Once every hour, a teacher would reappear in the hall 
to check that everything was quiet. Around three in 
the morning, when many students had finally fallen 
asleep, Professor Dumbledore came in. Harry watched 
him looking around for Percy, who had been prowling 
between the sleeping bags, telling people off for 
talking. Percy was only a short way away from Harry, 
Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron, and Hermione, who quickly pretended to be 
asleep as Dumbledore’s footsteps drew nearer. 

“Any sign of him, Professor?” asked Percy in a 
whisper. 

“No. All well here?” 

“Everything under control, sir.” 

“Good. There’s no point moving them all now. I’ve 
found a temporary guardian for the Gryffindor 
portrait hole. You’ll be able to move them back in 
tomorrow.” 

“And the Fat Lady, sir?” 

“Hiding in a map of Argyllshire on the second floor. 
Apparently she refused to let Black in without the 
password, so he attacked. She’s still very distressed, 
but once she’s calmed down, I’ll have Mr. Filch 
restore her.” 

Harry heard the door of the hall creak open again, 
and more footsteps. 

“Headmaster?” It was Snape. Harry kept quite still, 
listening hard. “The whole of the third floor has been 
searched. He’s not there. And Filch has done the 
dungeons; nothing there either.” 

“What about the Astronomy tower? Professor 
Trelawney’s room? The Owlery?” 

“All searched ...” 

“Very well, Severus. I didn’t really expect Black to 
linger.” 



Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Have you any theory as to how he got in, Professor?” 
asked Snape. 

Harry raised his head very slightly off his arms to free 
his other ear. 

“Many, Severus, each of them as unlikely as the 
next.” 

Harry opened his eyes a fraction and squinted up to 
where they stood; Dumbledore ’s back was to him, but 
he could see Percy’s face, rapt with attention, and 
Snape ’s profile, which looked angry. 

“You remember the conversation we had, 

Headmaster, just before — ah — the start of term?” 
said Snape, who was barely opening his lips, as 
though trying to block Percy out of the conversation. 

“I do, Severus,” said Dumbledore, and there was 
something like warning in his voice. 

“It seems — almost impossible — that Black could 
have entered the school without inside help. I did 
express my concerns when you appointed — ” 

“I do not believe a single person inside this castle 
would have helped Black enter it,” said Dumbledore, 
and his tone made it so clear that the subject was 
closed that Snape didn’t reply. “I must go down to the 
dementors,” said Dumbledore. “I said I would inform 
them when our search was complete.” 

“Didn’t they want to help, sir?” said Percy. 

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore coldly. “But I’m afraid no 
dementor will cross the threshold of this castle while I 
am headmaster.” 



Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Percy looked slightly abashed. Dumbledore left the 
hall, walking quickly and quietly. Snape stood for a 
moment, watching the headmaster with an expression 
of deep resentment on his face; then he too left. 

Harry glanced sideways at Ron and Hermione. Both of 
them had their eyes open too, reflecting the starry 
ceiling. 

“What was all that about?” Ron mouthed. 

The school talked of nothing but Sirius Black for the 
next few days. The theories about how he had entered 
the castle became wilder and wilder; Hannah Abbott, 
from Hufflepuff, spent much of their next Herbology 
class telling anyone who’d listen that Black could 
turn into a flowering shrub. 

The Fat Lady’s ripped canvas had been taken off the 
wall and replaced with the portrait of Sir Cadogan 
and his fat gray pony. Nobody was very happy about 
this. Sir Cadogan spent half his time challenging 
people to duels, and the rest thinking up ridiculously 
complicated passwords, which he changed at least 
twice a day. 

“He’s a complete lunatic,” said Seamus Finnigan 
angrily to Percy. “Can’t we get anyone else?” 

“None of the other pictures wanted the job,” said 
Percy. “Frightened of what happened to the Fat Lady. 
Sir Cadogan was the only one brave enough to 
volunteer.” 

Sir Cadogan, however, was the least of Harry’s 
worries. He was now being closely watched. Teachers 
found excuses to walk along corridors with him, and 
Percy Weasley (acting, Harry suspected, on his 
mother’s orders) was tailing him everywhere like an 
Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




extremely pompous guard dog. To cap it all, Professor 
McGonagall summoned Harry into her office, with 
such a somber expression on her face Harry thought 
someone must have died. 

“There’s no point hiding it from you any longer, 
Potter,” she said in a very serious voice. “I know this 
will come as a shock to you, but Sirius Black — ” 

“I know he’s after me,” said Harry wearily. “I heard 
Ron’s dad telling his mum. Mr. Weasley works for the 
Ministry of Magic.” 

Professor McGonagall seemed very taken aback. She 
stared at Harry for a moment or two, then said, “I see! 
Well, in that case, Potter, you’ll understand why I 
don’t think it’s a good idea for you to be practicing 
Quidditch in the evenings. Out on the field with only 
your team members, it’s very exposed, Potter — ” 

“We’ve got our first match on Saturday!” said Harry, 
outraged. “I’ve got to train, Professor!” 

Professor McGonagall considered him intently. Harry 
knew she was deeply interested in the Gryffindor 
team’s prospects; it had been she, after all, who’d 
suggested him as Seeker in the first place. He waited, 
holding his breath. 

“Hmm ...” Professor McGonagall stood up and stared 
out of the window at the Quidditch field, just visible 
through the rain. “Well ... goodness knows, I’d like to 
see us win the Cup at last ... but all the same, Potter 
... I’d be happier if a teacher were present. I’ll ask 
Madam Hooch to oversee your training sessions.” 

The weather worsened steadily as the first Quidditch 
match drew nearer. Undaunted, the Gryffindor team 
was training harder than ever under the eye of 

Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Madam Hooch. Then, at their final training session 
before Saturday’s match, Oliver Wood gave his team 
some unwelcome news. 

“We’re not playing Slytherin!” he told them, looking 
very angry. “Flint’s just been to see me. We’re playing 
Hufflepuff instead.” 

“Why?” chorused the rest of the team. 

“Flint’s excuse is that their Seeker’s arm’s still 
injured,” said Wood, grinding his teeth furiously. “But 
it’s obvious why they’re doing it. Don’t want to play in 
this weather. Think it’ll damage their chances. ...” 

There had been strong winds and heavy rain all day, 
and as Wood spoke, they heard a distant rumble of 
thunder. 

“There’s nothing wrong with Malfoy’s arm!” said Harry 
furiously. “He’s faking it!” 

“I know that, but we can’t prove it,” said Wood 
bitterly. “And we’ve been practicing all those moves 
assuming we’re playing Slytherin, and instead it’s 
Hufflepuff, and their style’s quite different. They’ve got 
a new Captain and Seeker, Cedric Diggory — ” 

Angelina, Alicia, and Katie suddenly giggled. 

“What?” said Wood, frowning at this lighthearted 
behavior. 

“He’s that tall, good-looking one, isn’t he?” said 
Angelina. 

“Strong and silent,” said Katie, and they started to 
giggle again. 



Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He’s only silent because he’s too thick to string two 
words together,” said Fred impatiently. “I don’t know 
why you’re worried, Oliver, Hufflepuff is a pushover. 
Last time we played them, Harry caught the Snitch in 
about five minutes, remember?” 

“We were playing in completely different conditions!” 
Wood shouted, his eyes bulging slightly. “Diggory’s 
put a very strong side together! He’s an excellent 
Seeker! I was afraid you’d take it like this! We mustn’t 
relax! We must keep our focus! Slytherin is trying to 
wrong-foot us! We must win!” 

“Oliver, calm down!” said Fred, looking slightly 
alarmed. “We’re taking Hufflepuff very seriously. 
Seriously.” 

The day before the match, the winds reached howling 
point and the rain fell harder than ever. It was so 
dark inside the corridors and classrooms that extra 
torches and lanterns were lit. The Slytherin team was 
looking very smug indeed, and none more so than 
Malfoy. 

“Ah, if only my arm was feeling a bit better!” he sighed 
as the gale outside pounded the windows. 

Harry had no room in his head to worry about 
anything except the match tomorrow. Oliver Wood 
kept hurrying up to him between classes and giving 
him tips. The third time this happened, Wood talked 
for so long that Harry suddenly realized he was ten 
minutes late for Defense Against the Dark Arts, and 
set off at a run with Wood shouting after him, 
“Diggory’s got a very fast swerve, Harry, so you might 
want to try looping him — ” 



Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry skidded to a halt outside the Defense Against 
the Dark Arts classroom, pulled the door open, and 
dashed inside. 

“Sorry I’m late, Professor Lupin, I — ” 

But it wasn’t Professor Lupin who looked up at him 
from the teacher’s desk; it was Snape. 

“This lesson began ten minutes ago, Potter, so I think 
we’ll make it ten points from Gryffindor. Sit down.” 

But Harry didn’t move. 

“Where’s Professor Lupin?” he said. 

“He says he is feeling too ill to teach today,” said 
Snape with a twisted smile. “I believe I told you to sit 
down?” 

But Harry stayed where he was. 

“What’s wrong with him?” 

Snape ’s black eyes glittered. 

“Nothing life-threatening,” he said, looking as though 
he wished it were. “Five more points from Gryffindor, 
and if I have to ask you to sit down again, it will be 
fifty.” 

Harry walked slowly to his seat and sat down. Snape 
looked around at the class. 

“As I was saying before Potter interrupted, Professor 
Lupin has not left any record of the topics you have 
covered so far — ” 



Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Please, sir, we’ve done boggarts, Red Caps, kappas, 
and grindylows,” said Hermione quickly, “and we’re 
just about to start — ” 

“Be quiet,” said Snape coldly. “I did not ask for 
information. I was merely commenting on Professor 
Lupin’s lack of organization.” 

“He’s the best Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher 
we’ve ever had,” said Dean Thomas boldly, and there 
was a murmur of agreement from the rest of the 
class. Snape looked more menacing than ever. 

“You are easily satisfied. Lupin is hardly overtaxing 
you — I would expect first years to be able to deal 
with Red Caps and grindylows. Today we shall 
discuss — ” 

Harry watched him flick through the textbook, to the 
very back chapter, which he must know they hadn’t 
covered. 

“ — werewolves,” said Snape. 

“But, sir,” said Hermione, seemingly unable to 
restrain herself, “we’re not supposed to do werewolves 
yet, we’re due to start hinkypunks — ” 

“Miss Granger,” said Snape in a voice of deadly calm, 
“I was under the impression that I am teaching this 
lesson, not you. And I am telling you all to turn to 
page 394.” He glanced around again. “All of you! 

Now\” 

With many bitter sidelong looks and some sullen 
muttering, the class opened their books. 

“Which of you can tell me how we distinguish between 
the werewolf and the true wolf?” said Snape. 

Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Everyone sat in motionless silence; everyone except 
Hermione, whose hand, as it so often did, had shot 
straight into the air. 

“Anyone?” Snape said, ignoring Hermione. His twisted 
smile was back. “Are you telling me that Professor 
Lupin hasn’t even taught you the basic distinction 
between — ” 

“We told you,” said Parvati suddenly, “we haven’t got 
as far as werewolves yet, we’re still on — ” 

“Silencel” snarled Snape. “Well, well, well, I never 
thought I’d meet a third -year class who wouldn’t even 
recognize a werewolf when they saw one. I shall make 
a point of informing Professor Dumbledore how very 
behind you all are. ...” 

“Please, sir,” said Hermione, whose hand was still in 
the air, “the werewolf differs from the true wolf in 
several small ways. The snout of the werewolf — ” 

“That is the second time you have spoken out of turn, 
Miss Granger,” said Snape coolly. “Five more points 
from Gryffindor for being an insufferable know-it-all.” 

Hermione went very red, put down her hand, and 
stared at the floor with her eyes full of tears. It was a 
mark of how much the class loathed Snape that they 
were all glaring at him, because every one of them 
had called Hermione a know-it-all at least once, and 
Ron, who told Hermione she was a know-it-all at least 
twice a week, said loudly, “You asked us a question 
and she knows the answer! Why ask if you don’t want 
to be told?” 

The class knew instantly he’d gone too far. Snape 
advanced on Ron slowly, and the room held its 
breath. 

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Detention, Weasley,” Snape said silkily, his face very 
close to Ron’s. “And if I ever hear you criticize the way 
I teach a class again, you will be very sorry indeed.” 

No one made a sound throughout the rest of the 
lesson. They sat and made notes on werewolves from 
the textbook, while Snape prowled up and down the 
rows of desks, examining the work they had been 
doing with Professor Lupin. 

“Very poorly explained . . . That is incorrect, the kappa 
is more commonly found in Mongolia. . . . Professor 
Lupin gave this eight out of ten? I wouldn’t have given 
it three. ...” 

When the bell rang at last, Snape held them back. 

“You will each write an essay, to be handed in to me, 
on the ways you recognize and kill werewolves. I want 
two rolls of parchment on the subject, and I want 
them by Monday morning. It is time somebody took 
this class in hand. Weasley, stay behind, we need to 
arrange your detention.” 

Harry and Hermione left the room with the rest of the 
class, who waited until they were well out of earshot, 
then burst into a furious tirade about Snape. 

“Snape ’s never been like this with any of our other 
Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers, even if he did 
want the job,” Harry said to Hermione. “Why’s he got 
it in for Lupin? D’you think this is all because of the 
boggart?” 

“I don’t know,” said Hermione pensively. “But I really 
hope Professor Lupin gets better soon. ...” 

Ron caught up with them five minutes later, in a 
towering rage. 

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“D’you know what that — ” (he called Snape 
something that made Hermione say “Ron\”) “ — is 
making me do? I’ve got to scrub out the bedpans in 
the hospital wing. Without magid” He was breathing 
deeply, his fists clenched. “Why couldn’t Black have 
hidden in Snape’s office, eh? He could have finished 
him off for us!” 

Harry woke extremely early the next morning; so early 
that it was still dark. For a moment he thought the 
roaring of the wind had woken him. Then he felt a 
cold breeze on the back of his neck and sat bolt 
upright — Peeves the Poltergeist had been floating 
next to him, blowing hard in his ear. 

“What did you do that for?” said Harry furiously. 

Peeves puffed out his cheeks, blew hard, and zoomed 
backward out of the room, cackling. 

Harry fumbled for his alarm clock and looked at it. It 
was half past four. Cursing Peeves, he rolled over and 
tried to get back to sleep, but it was very difficult, now 
that he was awake, to ignore the sounds of the 
thunder rumbling overhead, the pounding of the wind 
against the castle walls, and the distant creaking of 
the trees in the Forbidden Forest. In a few hours he 
would be out on the Quidditch field, battling through 
that gale. Finally, he gave up any thought of more 
sleep, got up, dressed, picked up his Nimbus Two 
Thousand, and walked quietly out of the dormitory. 

As Harry opened the door, something brushed against 
his leg. He bent down just in time to grab 
Crookshanks by the end of his bushy tail and drag 
him outside. 

“You know, I reckon Ron was right about you,” Harry 
told Crookshanks suspiciously. “There are plenty of 

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




mice around this place — go and chase them. Go on,” 
he added, nudging Crookshanks down the spiral 
staircase with his foot. “Leave Scabbers alone.” 

The noise of the storm was even louder in the 
common room. Harry knew better than to think the 
match would be canceled; Quidditch matches weren’t 
called off for trifles like thunderstorms. Nevertheless, 
he was starting to feel very apprehensive. Wood had 
pointed out Cedric Diggory to him in the corridor; 
Diggory was a fifth year and a lot bigger than Harry. 
Seekers were usually light and speedy, but Diggory’s 
weight would be an advantage in this weather 
because he was less likely to be blown off course. 

Harry whiled away the hours until dawn in front of 
the fire, getting up every now and then to stop 
Crookshanks from sneaking up the boys’ staircase 
again. At long last Harry thought it must be time for 
breakfast, so he headed through the portrait hole 
alone. 

“Stand and fight, you mangy cur!” yelled Sir Cadogan. 
“Oh, shut up,” Harry yawned. 

He revived a bit over a large bowl of porridge, and by 
the time he’d started on toast, the rest of the team 
had turned up. 

“It’s going to be a tough one,” said Wood, who wasn’t 
eating anything. 

“Stop worrying, Oliver,” said Alicia soothingly, “we 
don’t mind a bit of rain.” 

But it was considerably more than a bit of rain. Such 
was the popularity of Quidditch that the whole school 
turned out to watch the match as usual, but they ran 

Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




down the lawns toward the Quidditch field, heads 
bowed against the ferocious wind, umbrellas being 
whipped out of their hands as they went. Just before 
he entered the locker room, Harry saw Malfoy, 

Crabbe, and Goyle, laughing and pointing at him from 
under an enormous umbrella on their way to the 
stadium. 

The team changed into their scarlet robes and waited 
for Wood’s usual pre-match pep talk, but it didn’t 
come. He tried to speak several times, made an odd 
gulping noise, then shook his head hopelessly and 
beckoned them to follow him. 

The wind was so strong that they staggered sideways 
as they walked out onto the field. If the crowd was 
cheering, they couldn’t hear it over the fresh rolls of 
thunder. Rain was splattering over Harry’s glasses. 
How on earth was he going to see the Snitch in this? 

The Hufflepuffs were approaching from the opposite 
side of the field, wearing canary -yellow robes. The 
Captains walked up to each other and shook hands; 
Diggory smiled at Wood but Wood now looked as 
though he had lockjaw and merely nodded. Harry saw 
Madam Hooch’s mouth form the words, “Mount your 
brooms.” He pulled his right foot out of the mud with 
a squelch and swung it over his Nimbus Two 
Thousand. Madam Hooch put her whistle to her lips 
and gave it a blast that sounded shrill and distant — 
they were off. 

Harry rose fast, but his Nimbus was swerving slightly 
with the wind. He held it as steady as he could and 
turned, squinting into the rain. 

Within five minutes Harry was soaked to his skin and 
frozen, hardly able to see his teammates, let alone the 
tiny Snitch. He flew backward and forward across the 

Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




field past blurred red and yellow shapes, with no idea 
of what was happening in the rest of the game. He 
couldn’t hear the commentary over the wind. The 
crowd was hidden beneath a sea of cloaks and 
battered umbrellas. Twice Harry came very close to 
being unseated by a Bludger; his vision was so 
clouded by the rain on his glasses he hadn’t seen 
them coming. 

He lost track of time. It was getting harder and harder 
to hold his broom straight. The sky was getting 
darker, as though night had decided to come early. 
Twice Harry nearly hit another player, without 
knowing whether it was a teammate or opponent; 
everyone was now so wet, and the rain so thick, he 
could hardly tell them apart. ... 

With the first flash of lightning came the sound of 
Madam Hooch’s whistle; Harry could just see the 
outline of Wood through the thick rain, gesturing him 
to the ground. The whole team splashed down into 
the mud. 

“I called for time-out!” Wood roared at his team. 

“Come on, under here — ” 

They huddled at the edge of the field under a large 
umbrella; Harry took off his glasses and wiped them 
hurriedly on his robes. 

“What’s the score?” 

“We’re fifty points up,” said Wood, “but unless we get 
the Snitch soon, we’ll be playing into the night.” 

“I’ve got no chance with these on,” Harry said 
exasperatedly, waving his glasses. 



Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




At that very moment, Hermione appeared at his 
shoulder; she was holding her cloak over her head 
and was, inexplicably, beaming. 

“I’ve had an idea, Harry! Give me your glasses, quick!” 

He handed them to her, and as the team watched in 
amazement, Hermione tapped them with her wand 
and said, “Imperviusl” 

“There!” she said, handing them back to Harry. 
“They’ll repel water!” 

Wood looked as though he could have kissed her. 

“Brilliant!” he called hoarsely after her as she 
disappeared into the crowd. “Okay, team, let’s go for 
it!” 



Hermione ’s spell had done the trick. Harry was still 
numb with cold, still wetter than he’d ever been in his 
life, but he could see. Full of fresh determination, he 
urged his broom through the turbulent air, staring in 
every direction for the Snitch, avoiding a Bludger, 
ducking beneath Diggory, who was streaking in the 
opposite direction. ... 

There was another clap of thunder, followed 
immediately by forked lightning. This was getting 
more and more dangerous. Harry needed to get the 
Snitch quickly — 

He turned, intending to head back toward the middle 
of the field, but at that moment, another flash of 
lightning illuminated the stands, and Harry saw 
something that distracted him completely — the 
silhouette of an enormous shaggy black dog, clearly 
imprinted against the sky, motionless in the topmost, 
empty row of seats. 

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s numb hands slipped on the broom handle 
and his Nimbus dropped a few feet. Shaking his 
sodden bangs out of his eyes, he squinted back into 
the stands. The dog had vanished. 

“Harry!” came Wood’s anguished yell from the 
Gryffindor goal posts. “Harry, behind you!” 

Harry looked wildly around. Cedric Diggory was 
pelting up the field, and a tiny speck of gold was 
shimmering in the rain-filled air between them — 

With a jolt of panic, Harry threw himself flat to the 
broom-handle and zoomed toward the Snitch. 

“Come on!” he growled at his Nimbus as the rain 
whipped his face. “Fasteri” 

But something odd was happening. An eerie silence 
was falling across the stadium. The wind, though as 
strong as ever, was forgetting to roar. It was as 
though someone had turned off the sound, as though 
Harry had gone suddenly deaf — what was going on? 

And then a horribly familiar wave of cold swept over 
him, inside him, just as he became aware of 
something moving on the field below. . . . 

Before he’d had time to think, Harry had taken his 
eyes off the Snitch and looked down. 

At least a hundred dementors, their hidden faces 
pointing up at him, were standing beneath him. It 
was as though freezing water were rising in his chest, 
cutting at his insides. And then he heard it again. ... 
Someone was screaming, screaming inside his head 
... a woman . . . 

“Not Harry, not Harry, please not Harry\” 

Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ Stand aside, you silly girl ... stand aside, now. ...” 



“ Not Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead — ” 

Numbing, swirling white mist was filling Harry’s 
brain. . . . What was he doing? Why was he flying? He 
needed to help her. ... She was going to die. ... She 
was going to be murdered. ... 

He was falling, falling through the icy mist. 

“Not Harry\ Please ... have mercy ... have mercy. ...” 

A shrill voice was laughing, the woman was 
screaming, and Harry knew no more. 

“Lucky the ground was so soft.” 

“I thought he was dead for sure.” 

“But he didn’t even break his glasses.” 

Harry could hear the voices whispering, but they 
made no sense whatsoever. He didn’t have a clue 
where he was, or how he’d got there, or what he’d 
been doing before he got there. All he knew was that 
every inch of him was aching as though it had been 
beaten. 

“That was the scariest thing I’ve ever seen in my life.” 

Scariest . . . the scariest thing . . . hooded black figures 
... cold ... screaming ... 

Harry’s eyes snapped open. He was lying in the 
hospital wing. The Gryffindor Quidditch team, 
spattered with mud from head to foot, was gathered 
around his bed. Ron and Hermione were also there, 

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




looking as though they’d just climbed out of a 
swimming pool. 

“Harry!” said Fred, who looked extremely white 
underneath the mud. “How’re you feeling?” 

It was as though Harry’s memory was on fast forward. 
The lightning — the Grim — the Snitch — and the 
dementors ... 

“What happened?” he said, sitting up so suddenly 
they all gasped. 

“You fell off,” said Fred. “Must’ve been — what — fifty 
feet?” 

“We thought you’d died,” said Alicia, who was 
shaking. 

Hermione made a small, squeaky noise. Her eyes were 
extremely bloodshot. 

“But the match,” said Harry. “What happened? Are we 
doing a replay?” 

No one said anything. The horrible truth sank into 
Harry like a stone. 

“We didn’t — lose?” 

“Diggory got the Snitch,” said George. “Just after you 
fell. He didn’t realize what had happened. When he 
looked back and saw you on the ground, he tried to 
call it off. Wanted a rematch. But they won fair and 
square ... even Wood admits it.” 

“Where is Wood?” said Harry, suddenly realizing he 
wasn’t there. 



Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Still in the showers,” said Fred. “We think he’s trying 
to drown himself.” 

Harry put his face to his knees, his hands gripping 
his hair. Fred grabbed his shoulder and shook it 
roughly. 

“C’mon, Harry, you’ve never missed the Snitch 
before.” 

“There had to be one time you didn’t get it,” said 
George. 

“It’s not over yet,” said Fred. “We lost by a hundred 
points, right? So if Hufflepuff loses to Ravenclaw and 
we beat Ravenclaw and Slytherin ...” 

“Hufflepuff’ll have to lose by at least two hundred 
points,” said George. 

“But if they beat Ravenclaw ...” 

“No way, Ravenclaw is too good. But if Slytherin loses 
against Hufflepuff ...” 

“It all depends on the points — a margin of a hundred 
either way — ” 

Harry lay there, not saying a word. They had lost ... 
for the first time ever, he had lost a Quidditch match. 

After ten minutes or so, Madam Pomfrey came over to 
tell the team to leave him in peace. 

“Well come and see you later,” Fred told him. “Don’t 
beat yourself up, Harry, you’re still the best Seeker 
we’ve ever had.” 



Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The team trooped out, trailing mud behind them. 
Madam Pomfrey shut the door behind them, looking 
disapproving. Ron and Hermione moved nearer to 
Harry’s bed. 

“Dumbledore was really angry,” Hermione said in a 
quaking voice. “I’ve never seen him like that before. 

He ran onto the field as you fell, waved his wand, and 
you sort of slowed down before you hit the ground. 
Then he whirled his wand at the dementors. Shot 
silver stuff at them. They left the stadium right away. 
... He was furious they’d come onto the grounds. We 
heard him — ” 

“Then he magicked you onto a stretcher,” said Ron. 
“And walked up to school with you floating on it. 
Everyone thought you were ...” 

His voice faded, but Harry hardly noticed. He was 
thinking about what the dementors had done to him 
... about the screaming voice. He looked up and saw 
Ron and Hermione looking at him so anxiously that 
he quickly cast around for something matter-of-fact to 
say. 

“Did someone get my Nimbus?” 

Ron and Hermione looked quickly at each other. 

“Er — ” 



“What?” said Harry, looking from one to the other. 

“Well ... when you fell off, it got blown away,” said 
Hermione hesitantly. 

“And?” 



Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And it hit — it hit — oh, Harry — it hit the 
Whomping Willow.” 

Harry’s insides lurched. The Whomping Willow was a 
very violent tree that stood alone in the middle of the 
grounds. 

“And?” he said, dreading the answer. 

“Well, you know the Whomping Willow,” said Ron. “It 
— it doesn’t like being hit.” 

“Professor Flitwick brought it back just before you 
came around,” said Hermione in a very small voice. 

Slowly, she reached down for a bag at her feet, turned 
it upside down, and tipped a dozen bits of splintered 
wood and twig onto the bed, the only remains of 
Harry’s faithful, finally beaten broomstick. 



Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




10 




THE MARAUDER’S MAP 

Madam Pomfrey insisted on keeping Harry in the 
hospital wing for the rest of the weekend. He didn’t 
argue or complain, but he wouldn’t let her throw 
away the shattered remnants of his Nimbus Two 
Thousand. He knew he was being stupid, knew that 
the Nimbus was beyond repair, but Harry couldn’t 
help it; he felt as though he’d lost one of his best 
friends. 

He had a stream of visitors, all intent on cheering him 
up. Hagrid sent him a bunch of earwiggy flowers that 
looked like yellow cabbages, and Ginny Weasley, 
blushing furiously, turned up with a get-well card she 
had made herself, which sang shrilly unless Harry 
kept it shut under his bowl of fruit. The Gryffindor 
team visited again on Sunday morning, this time 
accompanied by Wood, who told Harry (in a hollow, 
dead sort of voice) that he didn’t blame him in the 
slightest. Ron and Hermione left Harry’s bedside only 
at night. But nothing anyone said or did could make 
Harry feel any better, because they knew only half of 
what was troubling him. 

Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



He hadn’t told anyone about the Grim, not even Ron 
and Hermione, because he knew Ron would panic 
and Hermione would scoff. The fact remained, 
however, that it had now appeared twice, and both 
appearances had been followed by near-fatal 
accidents; the first time, he had nearly been run over 
by the Knight Bus; the second, fallen fifty feet from 
his broomstick. Was the Grim going to haunt him 
until he actually died? Was he going to spend the rest 
of his life looking over his shoulder for the beast? 

And then there were the dementors. Harry felt sick 
and humiliated every time he thought of them. 
Everyone said the dementors were horrible, but no 
one else collapsed every time they went near one. No 
one else heard echoes in their head of their dying 
parents. 

Because Harry knew who that screaming voice 
belonged to now. He had heard her words, heard 
them over and over again during the night hours in 
the hospital wing while he lay awake, staring at the 
strips of moonlight on the ceiling. When the 
dementors approached him, he heard the last 
moments of his mother’s life, her attempts to protect 
him, Harry, from Lord Voldemort, and Voldemort’s 
laughter before he murdered her. . . . Harry dozed 
fitfully, sinking into dreams full of clammy, rotted 
hands and petrified pleading, jerking awake to dwell 
again on his mother’s voice. 

It was a relief to return to the noise and bustle of the 
main school on Monday, where he was forced to think 
about other things, even if he had to endure Draco 
Malfoy’s taunting. Malfoy was almost beside himself 
with glee at Gryffindor’s defeat. He had finally taken 
off his bandages, and celebrated having the full use of 
both arms again by doing spirited imitations of Harry 
falling off his broom. Malfoy spent much of their next 
Page | 205 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Potions class doing dementor imitations across the 
dungeon; Ron finally cracked and flung a large, 
slippery crocodile heart at Malfoy, which hit him in 
the face and caused Snape to take fifty points from 
Gryffindor. 

“If Snape’s teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts 
again, I’m skiving off,” said Ron as they headed 
toward Lupin’s classroom after lunch. “Check who’s 
in there, Hermione.” 

Hermione peered around the classroom door. 

“It’s okay!” 

Professor Lupin was back at work. It certainly looked 
as though he had been ill. His old robes were hanging 
more loosely on him and there were dark shadows 
beneath his eyes; nevertheless, he smiled at the class 
as they took their seats, and they burst at once into 
an explosion of complaints about Snape’s behavior 
while Lupin had been ill. 

“It’s not fair, he was only filling in, why should he give 
us homework?” 

“We don’t know anything about werewolves — ” 

“ — two rolls of parchment!” 

“Did you tell Professor Snape we haven’t covered them 
yet?” Lupin asked, frowning slightly. 

The babble broke out again. 

“Yes, but he said we were really behind — ” 

“ — he wouldn’t listen — ” 



Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — two rolls of parchmenti” 



Professor Lupin smiled at the look of indignation on 
every face. 

“Don’t worry. I’ll speak to Professor Snape. You don’t 
have to do the essay.” 

“Oh no,” said Hermione, looking very disappointed. 
“I’ve already finished it!” 

They had a very enjoyable lesson. Professor Lupin 
had brought along a glass box containing a 
hinkypunk, a little one-legged creature who looked as 
though he were made of wisps of smoke, rather frail 
and harmless-looking. 

“Lures travelers into bogs,” said Professor Lupin as 
they took notes. “You notice the lantern dangling from 
his hand? Hops ahead — people follow the light — 
then — ’ ” 

The hinkypunk made a horrible squelching noise 
against the glass. 

When the bell rang, everyone gathered up their things 
and headed for the door, Harry among them, but — 

“Wait a moment, Harry,” Lupin called. “I’d like a 
word.” 

Harry doubled back and watched Professor Lupin 
covering the hinkypunk’s box with a cloth. 

“I heard about the match,” said Lupin, turning back 
to his desk and starting to pile books into his 
briefcase, “and I’m sorry about your broomstick. Is 
there any chance of fixing it?” 

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Harry. “The tree smashed it to bits.” 

Lupin sighed. 

“They planted the Whomping Willow the same year 
that I arrived at Hogwarts. People used to play a 
game, trying to get near enough to touch the trunk. In 
the end, a boy called Davey Gudgeon nearly lost an 
eye, and we were forbidden to go near it. No 
broomstick would have a chance. 

“Did you hear about the dementors too?” said Harry 
with difficulty. 

Lupin looked at him quickly. 

“Yes, I did. I don’t think any of us have seen Professor 
Dumbledore that angry. They have been growing 
restless for some time ... furious at his refusal to let 
them inside the grounds. ... I suppose they were the 
reason you fell?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. He hesitated, and then the question 
he had to ask burst from him before he could stop 
himself. “ Why? Why do they affect me like that? Am I 
just — ?” 



“It has nothing to do with weakness,” said Professor 
Lupin sharply, as though he had read Harry’s mind. 
“The dementors affect you worse than the others 
because there are horrors in your past that the others 
don’t have.” 

A ray of wintery sunlight fell across the classroom, 
illuminating Lupin’s gray hairs and the lines on his 
young face. 

“Dementors are among the foulest creatures that walk 
this earth. They infest the darkest, filthiest places, 

Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




they glory in decay and despair, they drain peace, 
hope, and happiness out of the air around them. 

Even Muggles feel their presence, though they can’t 
see them. Get too near a dementor and every good 
feeling, every happy memory will be sucked out of 
you. If it can, the dementor will feed on you long 
enough to reduce you to something like itself . . . soul- 
less and evil. You’ll be left with nothing but the worst 
experiences of your life. And the worst that happened 
to you, Harry, is enough to make anyone fall off their 
broom. You have nothing to feel ashamed of.” 

“When they get near me — ” Harry stared at Lupin’s 
desk, his throat tight. “I can hear Voldemort 
murdering my mum.” 

Lupin made a sudden motion with his arm as though 
to grip Harry’s shoulder, but thought better of it. 

There was a moment’s silence, then — 

“Why did they have to come to the match?” said Harry 
bitterly. 

“They’re getting hungry,” said Lupin coolly, shutting 
his briefcase with a snap. “Dumbledore won’t let them 
into the school, so their supply of human prey has 
dried up. ... I don’t think they could resist the large 
crowd around the Quidditch field. All that excitement 
. . . emotions running high ... it was their idea of a 
feast.” 

“Azkaban must be terrible,” Harry muttered. Lupin 
nodded grimly. 

“The fortress is set on a tiny island, way out to sea, 
but they don’t need walls and water to keep the 
prisoners in, not when they’re all trapped inside their 
own heads, incapable of a single cheerful thought. 
Most of them go mad within weeks.” 

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But Sirius Black escaped from them,” Harry said 
slowly. “He got away. ...” 



Lupin’s briefcase slipped from the desk; he had to 
stoop quickly to catch it. 

“Yes,” he said, straightening up, “Black must have 
found a way to fight them. I wouldn’t have believed it 
possible. ... Dementors are supposed to drain a 
wizard of his powers if he is left with them too long. 



“You made that dementor on the train back off,” said 
Harry suddenly. 

“There are — certain defenses one can use,” said 
Lupin. “But there was only one dementor on the train. 
The more there are, the more difficult it becomes to 
resist.” 

“What defenses?” said Harry at once. “Can you teach 
me?” 

“I don’t pretend to be an expert at fighting dementors, 
Harry ... quite the contrary. ...” 

“But if the dementors come to another Quidditch 
match, I need to be able to fight them — ” 

Lupin looked into Harry’s determined face, hesitated, 
then said, “Well ... all right. I’ll try and help. But it’ll 
have to wait until next term, I’m afraid. I have a lot to 
do before the holidays. I chose a very inconvenient 
time to fall ill.” 

What with the promise of anti-dementor lessons from 
Lupin, the thought that he might never have to hear 
his mother’s death again, and the fact that Ravenclaw 
flattened Hufflepuff in their Quidditch match at the 

Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




end of November, Harry’s mood took a definite 
upturn. Gryffindor were not out of the running after 
all, although they could not afford to lose another 
match. Wood became repossessed of his manic 
energy, and worked his team as hard as ever in the 
chilly haze of rain that persisted into December. 

Harry saw no hint of a dementor within the grounds. 
Dumbledore’s anger seemed to be keeping them at 
their stations at the entrances. 

Two weeks before the end of the term, the sky 
lightened suddenly to a dazzling, opaline white and 
the muddy grounds were revealed one morning 
covered in glittering frost. Inside the castle, there was 
a buzz of Christmas in the air. Professor Flitwick, the 
Charms teacher, had already decorated his classroom 
with shimmering lights that turned out to be real, 
fluttering fairies. The students were all happily 
discussing their plans for the holidays. Both Ron and 
Hermione had decided to remain at Hogwarts, and 
though Ron said it was because he couldn’t stand two 
weeks with Percy, and Hermione insisted she needed 
to use the library, Harry wasn’t fooled; they were 
doing it to keep him company, and he was very 
grateful. 

To everyone’s delight except Harry’s, there was to be 
another Hogsmeade trip on the very last weekend of 
the term. 

“We can do all our Christmas shopping there!” said 
Hermione. “Mum and Dad would really love those 
Toothflossing Stringmints from Honeydukes!” 

Resigned to the fact that he would be the only third 
year staying behind again, Harry borrowed a copy of 
Which Broomstick from Wood, and decided to spend 
the day reading up on the different makes. He had 
been riding one of the school brooms at team 
Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




practice, an ancient Shooting Star, which was very 
slow and jerky; he definitely needed a new broom of 
his own. 



On the Saturday morning of the Hogsmeade trip, 
Harry bid good-bye to Ron and Hermione, who were 
wrapped in cloaks and scarves, then turned up the 
marble staircase alone, and headed back toward 
Gryffindor Tower. Snow had started to fall outside the 
windows, and the castle was very still and quiet. 

“Psst — Harry!” 

He turned, halfway along the third-floor corridor, to 
see Fred and George peering out at him from behind a 
statue of a humpbacked, one-eyed witch. 

“What are you doing?” said Harry curiously. “How 
come you’re not going to Hogsmeade?” 

“We’ve come to give you a bit of festive cheer before 
we go,” said Fred, with a mysterious wink. “Come in 
here. ...” 

He nodded toward an empty classroom to the left of 
the one-eyed statue. Harry followed Fred and George 
inside. George closed the door quietly and then 
turned, beaming, to look at Harry. 

“Early Christmas present for you, Harry,” he said. 

Fred pulled something from inside his cloak with a 
flourish and laid it on one of the desks. It was a large, 
square, very worn piece of parchment with nothing 
written on it. Harry, suspecting one of Fred and 
George’s jokes, stared at it. 

“What’s that supposed to be?” 

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“This, Harry, is the secret of our success,” said 
George, patting the parchment fondly. 

“It’s a wrench, giving it to you,” said Fred, “but we 
decided last night, your need’s greater than ours.” 

“Anyway, we know it by heart,” said George. “We 
bequeath it to you. We don’t really need it anymore.” 

“And what do I need with a bit of old parchment?” 
said Harry. 

“A bit of old parchment!” said Fred, closing his eyes 
with a grimace as though Harry had mortally offended 
him. “Explain, George.” 

“Well ... when we were in our first year, Harry — 
young, carefree, and innocent — ” 

Harry snorted. He doubted whether Fred and George 
had ever been innocent. 

“ — well, more innocent than we are now — we got 
into a spot of bother with Filch.” 

“We let off a Dungbomb in the corridor and it upset 
him for some reason — ” 

“So he hauled us off to his office and started 
threatening us with the usual — ” 

“ — detention — ” 

“ — disembowelment — ” 

“ — and we couldn’t help noticing a drawer in one of 
his filing cabinets marked Confiscated and Highly 
Dangerous.” 



Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t tell me — ” said Harry, starting to grin. 

“Well, what would you’ve done?” said Fred. “George 
caused a diversion by dropping another Dungbomb, I 
whipped the drawer open, and grabbed — this.” 

“It’s not as bad as it sounds, you know,” said George. 
“We don’t reckon Filch ever found out how to work it. 
He probably suspected what it was, though, or he 
wouldn’t have confiscated it.” 

“And you know how to work it?” 

“Oh yes,” said Fred, smirking. “This little beauty’s 
taught us more than all the teachers in this school.” 

“You’re winding me up,” said Harry, looking at the 
ragged old bit of parchment. 

“Oh, are we?” said George. 

He took out his wand, touched the parchment lightly, 
and said, “I solemnly swear that I am up to no good.” 

And at once, thin ink lines began to spread like a 
spider’s web from the point that George’s wand had 
touched. They joined each other, they crisscrossed, 
they fanned into every corner of the parchment; then 
words began to blossom across the top, great, curly 
green words, that proclaimed: 

Messrs. Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs 

Purveyors of Aids to Magical Mischief-Makers 

are proud to present 

THE MARAUDER’S MAP 



Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It was a map showing every detail of the Hogwarts 
castle and grounds. But the truly remarkable thing 
were the tiny ink dots moving around it, each labeled 
with a name in minuscule writing. Astounded, Harry 
bent over it. A labeled dot in the top left corner 
showed that Professor Dumbledore was pacing his 
study; the caretaker’s cat, Mrs. Norris, was prowling 
the second floor; and Peeves the Poltergeist was 
currently bouncing around the trophy room. And as 
Harry’s eyes traveled up and down the familiar 
corridors, he noticed something else. 

This map showed a set of passages he had never 
entered. And many of them seemed to lead — 

“Right into Hogsmeade,” said Fred, tracing one of 
them with his finger. “There are seven in all. Now, 
Filch knows about these four” — he pointed them out 
— “but we’re sure we’re the only ones who know 
about these. Don’t bother with the one behind the 
mirror on the fourth floor. We used it until last 
winter, but it’s caved in — completely blocked. And 
we don’t reckon anyone’s ever used this one, because 
the Whomping Willow’s planted right over the 
entrance. But this one here, this one leads right into 
the cellar of Honeydukes. We’ve used it loads of times. 
And as you might’ve noticed, the entrance is right 
outside this room, through that one-eyed old crone’s 
hump.” 

“Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs,” sighed 
George, patting the heading of the map. “We owe 
them so much.” 

“Noble men, working tirelessly to help a new 
generation of law-breakers,” said Fred solemnly. 

“Right,” said George briskly. “Don’t forget to wipe it 
after you’ve used it — ” 

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — or anyone can read it,” Fred said warningly. 

“Just tap it again and say, ‘Mischief managed!’ And 
it’ll go blank.” 

“So, young Harry,” said Fred, in an uncanny 
impersonation of Percy, “mind you behave yourself.” 

“See you in Honeydukes,” said George, winking. 

They left the room, both smirking in a satisfied sort of 
way. 

Harry stood there, gazing at the miraculous map. He 
watched the tiny ink Mrs. Norris turn left and pause 
to sniff at something on the floor. If Filch really didn’t 
know ... he wouldn’t have to pass the dementors at 
all. ... 

But even as he stood there, flooded with excitement, 
something Harry had once heard Mr. Weasley say 
came floating out of his memory. 

Never trust anything that can think for itself, if you 
can’t see where it keeps its brain. 

This map was one of those dangerous magical objects 
Mr. Weasley had been warning against. ... Aids for 
Magical Mischief-Makers . . . but then, Harry reasoned, 
he only wanted to use it to get into Hogsmeade, it 
wasn’t as though he wanted to steal anything or 
attack anyone ... and Fred and George had been 
using it for years without anything horrible 
happening. ... 

Harry traced the secret passage to Honeydukes with 
his finger. 



Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Then, quite suddenly, as though following orders, he 
rolled up the map, stuffed it inside his robes, and 
hurried to the door of the classroom. He opened it a 
couple of inches. There was no one outside. Very 
carefully, he edged out of the room and behind the 
statue of the one-eyed witch. 

What did he have to do? He pulled out the map again 
and saw, to his astonishment, that a new ink figure 
had appeared upon it, labeled Harry Potter. This 
figure was standing exactly where the real Harry was 
standing, about halfway down the third-floor corridor. 
Harry watched carefully. His little ink self appeared to 
be tapping the witch with his minute wand. Harry 
quickly took out his real wand and tapped the statue. 
Nothing happened. He looked back at the map. The 
tiniest speech bubble had appeared next to his figure. 
The word inside said, “ Dissendium.” 

“ Dissendiurrd” Harry whispered, tapping the stone 
witch again. 

At once, the statue’s hump opened wide enough to 
admit a fairly thin person. Harry glanced quickly up 
and down the corridor, then tucked the map away 
again, hoisted himself into the hole headfirst, and 
pushed himself forward. 

He slid a considerable way down what felt like a stone 
slide, then landed on cold, damp earth. He stood up, 
looking around. It was pitch dark. He held up his 
wand, muttered, “Lumos\” and saw that he was in a 
very narrow, low, earthy passageway. He raised the 
map, tapped it with the tip of his wand, and 
muttered, “Mischief managed!” The map went blank 
at once. He folded it carefully, tucked it inside his 
robes, then, heart beating fast, both excited and 
apprehensive, he set off. 



Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The passage twisted and turned, more like the burrow 
of a giant rabbit than anything else. Harry hurried 
along it, stumbling now and then on the uneven floor, 
holding his wand out in front of him. 

It took ages, but Harry had the thought of 
Honeydukes to sustain him. After what felt like an 
hour, the passage began to rise. Panting, Harry sped 
up, his face hot, his feet very cold. 

Ten minutes later, he came to the foot of some worn 
stone steps, which rose out of sight above him. 

Careful not to make any noise, Harry began to climb. 
A hundred steps, two hundred steps, he lost count as 
he climbed, watching his feet. ... Then, without 
warning, his head hit something hard. 

It seemed to be a trapdoor. Harry stood there, 
massaging the top of his head, listening. He couldn’t 
hear any sounds above him. Very slowly, he pushed 
the trapdoor open and peered over the edge. 

He was in a cellar, which was full of wooden crates 
and boxes. Harry climbed out of the trapdoor and 
replaced it — it blended so perfectly with the dusty 
floor that it was impossible to tell it was there. Harry 
crept slowly toward the wooden staircase that led 
upstairs. Now he could definitely hear voices, not to 
mention the tinkle of a bell and the opening and 
shutting of a door. 

Wondering what he ought to do, he suddenly heard a 
door open much closer at hand; somebody was about 
to come downstairs. 

“And get another box of Jelly Slugs, dear, they’ve 
nearly cleaned us out — ” said a woman’s voice. 



Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A pair of feet was coming down the staircase. Harry 
leapt behind an enormous crate and waited for the 
footsteps to pass. He heard the man shifting boxes 
against the opposite wall. He might not get another 
chance — 

Quickly and silently, Harry dodged out from his 
hiding place and climbed the stairs; looking back, he 
saw an enormous backside and shiny bald head, 
buried in a box. Harry reached the door at the top of 
the stairs, slipped through it, and found himself 
behind the counter of Honeydukes — he ducked, 
crept sideways, and then straightened up. 

Honeydukes was so crowded with Hogwarts students 
that no one looked twice at Harry. He edged among 
them, looking around, and suppressed a laugh as he 
imagined the look that would spread over Dudley’s 
piggy face if he could see where Harry was now. 

There were shelves upon shelves of the most 
succulent-looking sweets imaginable. Creamy chunks 
of nougat, shimmering pink squares of coconut ice, 
fat, honey-colored toffees; hundreds of different kinds 
of chocolate in neat rows; there was a large barrel of 
Every Flavor Beans, and another of Fizzing Whizbees, 
the levitating sherbert balls that Ron had mentioned; 
along yet another wall were “Special Effects” sweets: 
Drooble’s Best Blowing Gum (which filled a room with 
bluebell-colored bubbles that refused to pop for days), 
the strange, splintery Toothflossing Stringmints, tiny 
black Pepper Imps (“breathe fire for your friends!”), 

Ice Mice (“hear your teeth chatter and squeak!”), 
peppermint creams shaped like toads (“hop 
realistically in the stomach!”), fragile sugar-spun 
quills, and exploding bonbons. 

Harry squeezed himself through a crowd of sixth 
years and saw a sign hanging in the farthest corner of 

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the shop (UNUSUAL TASTES). Ron and Hermione 
were standing underneath it, examining a tray of 
blood-flavored lollipops. Harry sneaked up behind 
them. 

“Ugh, no, Harry won’t want one of those, they’re for 
vampires, I expect,” Hermione was saying. 

“How about these?” said Ron, shoving ajar of 
Cockroach Clusters under Hermione ’s nose. 

“Definitely not,” said Harry. 

Ron nearly dropped the jar. 

“Harry\” squealed Hermione. “What are you doing 
here? How — how did you — ?” 

“Wow!” said Ron, looking very impressed, “you’ve 
learned to Apparate!” 

“ ’Course I haven’t,” said Harry. He dropped his voice 
so that none of the sixth years could hear him and 
told them all about the Marauder’s Map. 

“How come Fred and George never gave it to me!” said 
Ron, outraged. “I’m their brother!” 

“But Harry isn’t going to keep it!” said Hermione, as 
though the idea were ludicrous. “He’s going to hand it 
in to Professor McGonagall, aren’t you, Harry?” 

“No, I’m not!” said Harry. 

“Are you mad?” said Ron, goggling at Hermione. 

“Hand in something that good?” 

“If I hand it in, I’ll have to say where I got it! Filch 
would know Fred and George had nicked it!” 

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But what about Sirius Black?” Hermione hissed. “He 
could be using one of the passages on that map to get 
into the castle! The teachers have got to know!” 

“He can’t be getting in through a passage,” said Harry 
quickly. “There are seven secret tunnels on the map, 
right? Fred and George reckon Filch already knows 
about four of them. And of the other three — one of 
them’s caved in, so no one can get through it. One of 
them’s got the Whomping Willow planted over the 
entrance, so you can’t get out of it. And the one I just 
came through — well — it’s really hard to see the 
entrance to it down in the cellar, so unless he knew it 
was there ...” 

Harry hesitated. What if Black did know the passage 
was there? Ron, however, cleared his throat 
significantly, and pointed to a notice pasted on the 
inside of the sweetshop door. 

— BY ORDER OF — 

THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC 

Customers are reminded that until further notice, 
dementors will be patrolling the streets of Hogsmeade 
every night after sundown. This measure has been put 
in place for the safety of Hogsmeade residents and will 
be lifted upon the recapture of Sirius Black. It is 
therefore advisable that you complete your shopping 
well before nightfall. 

Merry Christmas! 



“See?” said Ron quietly. “I’d like to see Black try and 
break into Honeydukes with dementors swarming all 



Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




over the village. Anyway, Hermione, the Honeydukes 
owners would hear a break-in, wouldn’t they? They 
live over the shop!” 

“Yes, but — but — ” Hermoine seemed to be struggling 
to find another problem. “Look, Harry still shouldn’t 
be coming into Hogsmeade. He hasn’t got a signed 
form! If anyone finds out, he’ll be in so much trouble! 
And it’s not nightfall yet — what if Sirius Black turns 
up today? Now?” 

“He’d have a job spotting Harry in this,” said Ron, 
nodding through the mullioned windows at the thick, 
swirling snow. “Come on, Hermione, it’s Christmas. 
Harry deserves a break.” 

Hermione bit her lip, looking extremely worried. 

“Are you going to report me?” Harry asked her, 
grinning. 

“Oh — of course not — but honestly, Harry — ” 

“Seen the Fizzing Whizbees, Harry?” said Ron, 
grabbing him and leading him over to their barrel. 
“And the Jelly Slugs? And the Acid Pops? Fred gave 
me one of those when I was seven — it burnt a hole 
right through my tongue. I remember Mum walloping 
him with her broomstick.” Ron stared broodingly into 
the Acid Pop box. “Reckon Fred’d take a bit of 
Cockroach Cluster if I told him they were peanuts?” 

When Ron and Hermione had paid for all their sweets, 
the three of them left Honeydukes for the blizzard 
outside. 

Hogsmeade looked like a Christmas card; the little 
thatched cottages and shops were all covered in a 
layer of crisp snow; there were holly wreaths on the 

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




doors and strings of enchanted candles hanging in 
the trees. 

Harry shivered; unlike the other two, he didn’t have 
his cloak. They headed up the street, heads bowed 
against the wind, Ron and Hermione shouting 
through their scarves. 

“That’s the post office — ” 

“Zonko’s is up there — ” 

“We could go up to the Shrieking Shack — ” 

“Tell you what,” said Ron, his teeth chattering, “shall 
we go for a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks?” 

Harry was more than willing; the wind was fierce and 
his hands were freezing, so they crossed the road, 
and in a few minutes were entering the tiny inn. 

It was extremely crowded, noisy, warm, and smoky. A 
curvy sort of woman with a pretty face was serving a 
bunch of rowdy warlocks up at the bar. 

“That’s Madam Rosmerta,” said Ron. “I’ll get the 
drinks, shall I?” he added, going slightly red. 

Harry and Hermione made their way to the back of 
the room, where there was a small, vacant table 
between the window and a handsome Christmas tree, 
which stood next to the fireplace. Ron came back five 
minutes later, carrying three foaming tankards of hot 
butterbeer. 

“Merry Christmas!” he said happily, raising his 
tankard. 



Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry drank deeply. It was the most delicious thing 
he’d ever tasted and seemed to heat every bit of him 
from the inside. 

A sudden breeze ruffled his hair. The door of the 
Three Broomsticks had opened again. Harry looked 
over the rim of his tankard and choked. 

Professors McGonagall and Flitwick had just entered 
the pub with a flurry of snowflakes, shortly followed 
by Hagrid, who was deep in conversation with a portly 
man in a lime-green bowler hat and a pinstriped 
cloak — Cornelius Fudge, Minister of Magic. 

In an instant, Ron and Hermione had both placed 
hands on the top of Harry’s head and forced him off 
his stool and under the table. Dripping with 
butterbeer and crouching out of sight, Harry clutched 
his empty tankard and watched the teachers’ and 
Fudge’s feet move toward the bar, pause, then turn 
and walk right toward him. 

Somewhere above him, Hermione whispered, 
“Mobiliarbus\” 

The Christmas tree beside their table rose a few 
inches off the ground, drifted sideways, and landed 
with a soft thump right in front of their table, hiding 
them from view. Staring through the dense lower 
branches, Harry saw four sets of chair legs move back 
from the table right beside theirs, then heard the 
grunts and sighs of the teachers and minister as they 
sat down. 

Next he saw another pair of feet, wearing sparkly 
turquoise high heels, and heard a woman’s voice. 

“A small gillywater — ” 



Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Mine,” said Professor McGonagall’s voice. 

“Four pints of mulled mead — ” 

“Ta, Rosmerta,” said Hagrid. 

“A cherry syrup and soda with ice and umbrella — ” 

“Mmm!” said Professor Flitwick, smacking his lips. 

“So you 11 be the red currant rum, Minister.” 

“Thank you, Rosmerta, m’dear,” said Fudge’s voice. 
“Lovely to see you again, I must say. Have one 
yourself, won’t you? Come and join us. ...” 

“Well, thank you very much, Minister.” 

Harry watched the glittering heels march away and 
back again. His heart was pounding uncomfortably in 
his throat. Why hadn’t it occurred to him that this 
was the last weekend of term for the teachers too? 
And how long were they going to sit there? He needed 
time to sneak back into Honeydukes if he wanted to 
return to school tonight. ... Hermione’s leg gave a 
nervous twitch next to him. 

“So, what brings you to this neck of the woods, 
Minister?” came Madam Rosmerta’s voice. 

Harry saw the lower part of Fudge’s thick body twist 
in his chair as though he were checking for 
eavesdroppers. Then he said in a quiet voice, “What 
else, m’dear, but Sirius Black? I daresay you heard 
what happened up at the school at Halloween?” 

“I did hear a rumor,” admitted Madam Rosmerta. 



Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Did you tell the whole pub, Hagrid?” said Professor 
McGonagall exasperatedly. 

“Do you think Black’s still in the area, Minister?” 
whispered Madam Rosmerta. 

“I’m sure of it,” said Fudge shortly. 

“You know that the dementors have searched the 
whole village twice?” said Madam Rosmerta, a slight 
edge to her voice. “Scared all my customers away. ... 
It’s very bad for business, Minister.” 

“Rosmerta, m’dear, I don’t like them any more than 
you do,” said Fudge uncomfortably. “Necessary 
precaution ... unfortunate, but there you are. ... I’ve 
just met some of them. They’re in a fury against 
Dumbledore — he won’t let them inside the castle 
grounds.” 

“I should think not,” said Professor McGonagall 
sharply. “How are we supposed to teach with those 
horrors floating around?” 

“Hear, hear!” squeaked tiny Professor Flitwick, whose 
feet were dangling a foot from the ground. 

“All the same,” demurred Fudge, “they are here to 
protect you all from something much worse. ... We all 
know what Black’s capable of. ...” 

“Do you know, I still have trouble believing it,” said 
Madam Rosmerta thoughtfully. “Of all the people to 
go over to the Dark Side, Sirius Black was the last I’d 
have thought ... I mean, I remember him when he was 
a boy at Hogwarts. If you’d told me then what he was 
going to become, I’d have said you’d had too much 
mead.” 



Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You don’t know the half of it, Rosmerta,” said Fudge 
gruffly. “The worst he did isn’t widely known.” 

“The worst?” said Madam Rosmerta, her voice alive 
with curiosity. “Worse than murdering all those poor 
people, you mean?” 

“I certainly do,” said Fudge. 

“I can’t believe that. What could possibly be worse?” 

“You say you remember him at Hogwarts, Rosmerta,” 
murmured Professor McGonagall. “Do you remember 
who his best friend was?” 

“Naturally,” said Madam Rosmerta, with a small 
laugh. “Never saw one without the other, did you? The 
number of times I had them in here — ooh, they used 
to make me laugh. Quite the double act, Sirius Black 
and James Potter!” 

Harry dropped his tankard with a loud clunk. Ron 
kicked him. 

“Precisely,” said Professor McGonagall. “Black and 
Potter. Ringleaders of their little gang. Both very 
bright, of course — exceptionally bright, in fact — but 
I don’t think we’ve ever had such a pair of 
troublemakers — ” 

“I dunno,” chuckled Hagrid. “Fred and George 
Weasley could give ’em a run fer their money.” 

“You’d have thought Black and Potter were brothers!” 
chimed in Professor Flitwick. “Inseparable!” 

“Of course they were,” said Fudge. “Potter trusted 
Black beyond all his other friends. Nothing changed 
when they left school. Black was best man when 

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




James married Lily. Then they named him godfather 
to Harry. Harry has no idea, of course. You can 
imagine how the idea would torment him.” 

“Because Black turned out to be in league with You- 
Know-Who?” whispered Madam Rosmerta. 

“Worse even than that, m’dear. ...” Fudge dropped his 
voice and proceeded in a sort of low rumble. “Not 
many people are aware that the Potters knew You- 
Know-Who was after them. Dumbledore, who was of 
course working tirelessly against You-Know-Who, had 
a number of useful spies. One of them tipped him off, 
and he alerted James and Lily at once. He advised 
them to go into hiding. Well, of course, You-Know- 
Who wasn’t an easy person to hide from. Dumbledore 
told them that their best chance was the Fidelius 
Charm.” 

“How does that work?” said Madam Rosmerta, 
breathless with interest. Professor Flitwick cleared his 
throat. 

“An immensely complex spell,” he said squeakily, 
“involving the magical concealment of a secret inside 
a single, living soul. The information is hidden inside 
the chosen person, or Secret-Keeper, and is 
henceforth impossible to find — unless, of course, the 
Secret-Keeper chooses to divulge it. As long as the 
Secret-Keeper refused to speak, You-Know-Who could 
search the village where Lily and James were staying 
for years and never find them, not even if he had his 
nose pressed against their sitting room window!” 

“So Black was the Potters’ Secret-Keeper?” whispered 
Madam Rosmerta. 

“Naturally,” said Professor McGonagall. “James Potter 
told Dumbledore that Black would die rather than tell 

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




where they were, that Black was planning to go into 
hiding himself . . . and yet, Dumbledore remained 
worried. I remember him offering to be the Potters’ 
Secret-Keeper himself.” 

“He suspected Black?” gasped Madam Rosmerta. 

“He was sure that somebody close to the Potters had 
been keeping You-Know-Who informed of their 
movements,” said Professor McGonagall darkly. 
“Indeed, he had suspected for some time that 
someone on our side had turned traitor and was 
passing a lot of information to You-Know-Who.” 

“But James Potter insisted on using Black?” 

“He did,” said Fudge heavily. “And then, barely a week 
after the Fidelius Charm had been performed — ” 

“Black betrayed them?” breathed Madam Rosmerta. 

“He did indeed. Black was tired of his double-agent 
role, he was ready to declare his support openly for 
You-Know-Who, and he seems to have planned this 
for the moment of the Potters’ death. But, as we all 
know, You-Know-Who met his downfall in little Harry 
Potter. Powers gone, horribly weakened, he fled. And 
this left Black in a very nasty position indeed. His 
master had fallen at the very moment when he, Black, 
had shown his true colors as a traitor. He had no 
choice but to run for it — ” 

“Filthy, stinkin’ turncoat!” Hagrid said, so loudly that 
half the bar went quiet. 

“Shh!” said Professor McGonagall. 

“I met him!” growled Hagrid. “I musta bin the last ter 
see him before he killed all them people! It was me 

Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




what rescued Harry from Lily an’ James’s house after 
they was killed! Jus’ got him outta the ruins, poor 
little thing, with a great slash across his forehead, an’ 
his parents dead ... an’ Sirius Black turns up, on that 
flyin’ motorbike he used ter ride. Never occurred ter 
me what he was doin’ there. I didn’ know he’d bin Lily 
an’ James’s Secret-Keeper. Thought he’d jus’ heard 
the news o’ You- Know- Who’s attack an’ come ter see 
what he could do. White an’ shakin’, he was. An’ yeh 
know what I did? I COMFORTED THE MURDERIN’ 
TRAITOR!” Hagrid roared. 

“Hagrid, please!” said Professor McGonagall. “Keep 
your voice down!” 

“How was I ter know he wasn’ upset abou’ Lily an’ 
James? It was You-Know-Who he cared abou’! An’ 
then he says, ‘Give Harry ter me, Hagrid, I’m his 
godfather, I’ll look after him — ’ Ha! But I’d had me 
orders from Dumbledore, an’ I told Black no, 
Dumbledore said Harry was ter go ter his aunt an’ 
uncle’s. Black argued, but in the end he gave in. Told 
me ter take his motorbike ter get Harry there. ‘I won’t 
need it anymore,’ he says. 

“I shoulda known there was somethin’ fishy goin’ on 
then. He loved that motorbike, what was he givin’ it 
ter me for? Why wouldn’ he need it anymore? Fact 
was, it was too easy ter trace. Dumbledore knew he’d 
bin the Potters’ Secret-Keeper. Black knew he was 
goin’ ter have ter run fer it that night, knew it was a 
matter o’ hours before the Ministry was after him. 

“But what if I’d given Harry to him, eh? I bet he ’d’ve 
pitched him off the bike halfway out ter sea. His bes’ 
friends’ son! But when a wizard goes over ter the Dark 
Side, there’s nothin’ and no one that matters to ’em 
anymore. ...” 



Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A long silence followed Hagrid ’s story. Then Madam 
Rosmerta said with some satisfaction, “But he didn’t 
manage to disappear, did he? The Ministry of Magic 
caught up with him next day!” 

“Alas, if only we had,” said Fudge bitterly. “It was not 
we who found him. It was little Peter Pettigrew — 
another of the Potters’ friends. Maddened by grief, no 
doubt, and knowing that Black had been the Potters’ 
Secret-Keeper, he went after Black himself.” 

“Pettigrew . . . that fat little boy who was always 
tagging around after them at Hogwarts?” said Madam 
Rosmerta. 

“Hero-worshipped Black and Potter,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “Never quite in their league, talent-wise. 

I was often rather sharp with him. You can imagine 
how I — how I regret that now. ...” She sounded as 
though she had a sudden head cold. 

“There, now, Minerva,” said Fudge kindly, “Pettigrew 
died a hero’s death. Eyewitnesses — Muggles, of 
course, we wiped their memories later — told us how 
Pettigrew cornered Black. They say he was sobbing, 
“Lily and James, Sirius! How could you?’ And then he 
went for his wand. Well, of course, Black was quicker. 
Blew Pettigrew to smithereens. ...” 

Professor McGonagall blew her nose and said thickly, 
“Stupid boy . . . foolish boy ... he was always hopeless 
at dueling ... should have left it to the Ministry. ...” 

“I tell yeh, if I’d got ter Black before little Pettigrew 
did, I wouldn’t’ve messed around with wands — I’d’ve 
ripped him limb — from — limb,” Hagrid growled. 

“You don’t know what you’re talking about, Hagrid,” 
said Fudge sharply. “Nobody but trained Hit Wizards 

Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




from the Magical Law Enforcement Squad would have 
stood a chance against Black once he was cornered. I 
was Junior Minister in the Department of Magical 
Catastrophes at the time, and I was one of the first on 
the scene after Black murdered all those people. I — I 
will never forget it. I still dream about it sometimes. A 
crater in the middle of the street, so deep it had 
cracked the sewer below. Bodies everywhere. Muggles 
screaming. And Black standing there laughing, with 
what was left of Pettigrew in front of him ... a heap of 
bloodstained robes and a few — a few fragments — ” 

Fudge’s voice stopped abruptly. There was the sound 
of five noses being blown. 

“Well, there you have it, Rosmerta,” said Fudge 
thickly. “Black was taken away by twenty members of 
the Magical Law Enforcement Squad and Pettigrew 
received the Order of Merlin, First Class, which I 
think was some comfort to his poor mother. Black’s 
been in Azkaban ever since.” 

Madam Rosmerta let out a long sigh. 

“Is it true he’s mad, Minister?” 

“I wish I could say that he was,” said Fudge slowly. “I 
certainly believe his master’s defeat unhinged him for 
a while. The murder of Pettigrew and all those 
Muggles was the action of a cornered and desperate 
man — cruel ... pointless. Yet I met Black on my last 
inspection of Azkaban. You know, most of the 
prisoners in there sit muttering to themselves in the 
dark; there’s no sense in them ... but I was shocked 
at how normal Black seemed. He spoke quite 
rationally to me. It was unnerving. You’d have 
thought he was merely bored — asked if I’d finished 
with my newspaper, cool as you please, said he 
missed doing the crossword. Yes, I was astounded at 
Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




how little effect the dementors seemed to be having on 
him — and he was one of the most heavily guarded in 
the place, you know. Dementors outside his door day 
and night.” 

“But what do you think he’s broken out to do?” said 
Madam Rosmerta. “Good gracious, Minister, he isn’t 
trying to rejoin You-Know-Who, is he?” 

“I daresay that is his — er — eventual plan,” said 
Fudge evasively. “But we hope to catch Black long 
before that. I must say, You-Know-Who alone and 
friendless is one thing . . . but give him back his most 
devoted servant, and I shudder to think how quickly 
he’ll rise again. ...” 

There was a small chink of glass on wood. Someone 
had set down their glass. 

“You know, Cornelius, if you’re dining with the 
headmaster, we’d better head back up to the castle,” 
said Professor McGonagall. 

One by one, the pairs of feet in front of Harry took the 
weight of their owners once more; hems of cloaks 
swung into sight, and Madam Rosemerta’s glittering 
heels disappeared behind the bar. The door of the 
Three Broomsticks opened again, there was another 
flurry of snow, and the teachers had disappeared. 

“Harry?” 

Ron’s and Hermione’s faces appeared under the table. 
They were both staring at him, lost for words. 



Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE FIREBOLT 

Harry didn’t have a very clear idea of how he had 
managed to get back into the Honeydukes cellar, 
through the tunnel, and into the castle once more. All 
he knew was that the return trip seemed to take no 
time at all, and that he hardly noticed what he was 
doing, because his head was still pounding with the 
conversation he had just heard. 

Why had nobody ever told him? Dumbledore, Hagrid, 
Mr. Weasley, Cornelius Fudge ... why hadn’t anyone 
ever mentioned the fact that Harry’s parents had died 
because their best friend had betrayed them? 

Ron and Hermione watched Harry nervously all 
through dinner, not daring to talk about what they’d 
overheard, because Percy was sitting close by them. 
When they went upstairs to the crowded common 
room, it was to find Fred and George had set off half a 
dozen Dungbombs in a fit of end-of-term high spirits. 
Harry, who didn’t want Fred and George asking him 
whether he’d reached Hogsmeade or not, sneaked 
quietly up to the empty dormitory and headed 
Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



straight for his bedside cabinet. He pushed his books 
aside and quickly found what he was looking for — 
the leather-bound photo album Hagrid had given him 
two years ago, which was full of wizard pictures of his 
mother and father. He sat down on his bed, drew the 
hangings around him, and started turning the pages, 
searching, until ... 

He stopped on a picture of his parents’ wedding day. 
There was his father waving up at him, beaming, the 
untidy black hair Harry had inherited standing up in 
all directions. There was his mother, alight with 
happiness, arm in arm with his dad. And there ... 
that must be him. Their best man ... Harry had never 
given him a thought before. 

If he hadn’t known it was the same person, he would 
never have guessed it was Black in this old 
photograph. His face wasn’t sunken and waxy, but 
handsome, full of laughter. Had he already been 
working for Voldemort when this picture had been 
taken? Was he already planning the deaths of the two 
people next to him? Did he realize he was facing 
twelve years in Azkaban, twelve years that would 
make him unrecognizable? 

But the dementors don’t affect him, Harry thought, 
staring into the handsome, laughing face. He doesn’t 
have to hear my mum screaming if they get too close — 

Harry slammed the album shut, reached over and 
stuffed it back into his cabinet, took off his robe and 
glasses and got into bed, making sure the hangings 
were hiding him from view. 

The dormitory door opened. 

“Harry?” said Ron’s voice uncertainly. 



Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But Harry lay still, pretending to be asleep. He heard 
Ron leave again, and rolled over on his back, his eyes 
wide open. 

A hatred such as he had never known before was 
coursing through Harry like poison. He could see 
Black laughing at him through the darkness, as 
though somebody had pasted the picture from the 
album over his eyes. He watched, as though 
somebody was playing him a piece of film, Sirius 
Black blasting Peter Pettigrew (who resembled Neville 
Longbottom) into a thousand pieces. He could hear 
(though having no idea what Black’s voice might 
sound like) a low, excited mutter. “It has happened, 
My Lord . . . the Potters have made me their Secret- 
Keeper. ...” And then came another voice, laughing 
shrilly, the same laugh that Harry heard inside his 
head whenever the dementors drew near. . . . 

“Harry, you — you look terrible.” 

Harry hadn’t gotten to sleep until daybreak. He had 
awoken to find the dormitory deserted, dressed, and 
gone down the spiral staircase to a common room 
that was completely empty except for Ron, who was 
eating a Peppermint Toad and massaging his 
stomach, and Hermione, who had spread her 
homework over three tables. 

“Where is everyone?” said Harry. 

“Gone! It’s the first day of the holidays, remember?” 
said Ron, watching Harry closely. “It’s nearly 
lunchtime; I was going to come and wake you up in a 
minute.” 

Harry slumped into a chair next to the fire. Snow was 
still falling outside the windows. Crookshanks was 
spread out in front of the fire like a large, ginger rug. 

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You really don’t look well, you know,” Hermione said, 
peering anxiously into his face. 

“I’m fine,” said Harry. 

“Harry, listen,” said Hermione, exchanging a look with 
Ron, “you must be really upset about what we heard 
yesterday. But the thing is, you mustn’t go doing 
anything stupid.” 

“Like what?” said Harry. 

“Like trying to go after Black,” said Ron sharply. 

Harry could tell they had rehearsed this conversation 
while he had been asleep. He didn’t say anything. 

“You won’t, will you, Harry?” said Hermione. 

“Because Black’s not worth dying for,” said Ron. 

Harry looked at them. They didn’t seem to 
understand at all. 

“D’you know what I see and hear every time a 
dementor gets too near me?” Ron and Hermione 
shook their heads, looking apprehensive. “I can hear 
my mum screaming and pleading with Voldemort. 

And if you’d heard your mum screaming like that, 
just about to be killed, you wouldn’t forget it in a 
hurry. And if you found out someone who was 
supposed to be a friend of hers betrayed her and sent 
Voldemort after her — ” 

“There’s nothing you can do!” said Hermione, looking 
stricken. “The dementors will catch Black and he’ll go 
back to Azkaban and — and serve him right!” 



Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You heard what Fudge said. Black isn’t affected by 
Azkaban like normal people are. It’s not a 
punishment for him like it is for the others.” 

“So what are you saying?” said Ron, looking very 
tense. “You want to — to kill Black or something?” 

“Don’t be silly,” said Hermione in a panicky voice. 
“Harry doesn’t want to kill anyone, do you, Harry?” 

Again, Harry didn’t answer. He didn’t know what he 
wanted to do. All he knew was that the idea of doing 
nothing, while Black was at liberty, was almost more 
than he could stand. 

“Malfoy knows,” he said abruptly. “Remember what 
he said to me in Potions? ‘If it was me, I’d hunt him 
down myself. ... I’d want revenge.’ ” 

“You’re going to take Malfoy ’s advice instead of ours?” 
said Ron furiously. “Listen ... you know what 
Pettigrew’s mother got back after Black had finished 
with him? Dad told me — the Order of Merlin, First 
Class, and Pettigrew’s finger in a box. That was the 
biggest bit of him they could find. Black’s a madman, 
Harry, and he’s dangerous — ” 

“Malfoy’s dad must have told him,” said Harry, 
ignoring Ron. “He was right in Voldemort’s inner 
circle — ” 

“ Say You-Knotu-Who, will you?” interjected Ron 
angrily. 

“ — so obviously, the Malfoys knew Black was working 
for Voldemort — ” 

“ — and Malfoy’d love to see you blown into about a 
million pieces, like Pettigrew! Get a grip. Malfoy’s just 

Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




hoping you 11 get yourself killed before he has to play 
you at Quidditch.” 

“Harry, please,” said Hermione, her eyes now shining 
with tears, “please be sensible. Black did a terrible, 
terrible thing, but d-don’t put yourself in danger, it’s 
what Black wants. ... Oh, Harry, you’d be playing 
right into Black’s hands if you went looking for him. 
Your mum and dad wouldn’t want you to get hurt, 
would they? They’d never want you to go looking for 
Black!” 

“I’ll never know what they’d have wanted, because 
thanks to Black, I’ve never spoken to them,” said 
Harry shortly. 

There was a silence in which Crookshanks stretched 
luxuriously, flexing his claws. Ron’s pocket quivered. 

“Look,” said Ron, obviously casting around for a 
change of subject, “it’s the holidays! It’s nearly 
Christmas! Let’s — let’s go down and see Hagrid. We 
haven’t visited him for ages!” 

“No!” said Hermione quickly. “Harry isn’t supposed to 
leave the castle, Ron — ” 

“Yeah, let’s go,” said Harry, sitting up, “and I can ask 
him how come he never mentioned Black when he 
told me all about my parents!” 

Further discussion of Sirius Black plainly wasn’t 
what Ron had had in mind. 

“Or we could have a game of chess,” he said hastily, 
“or Gobstones. Percy left a set — ” 

“No, let’s visit Hagrid,” said Harry firmly. 



Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




So they got their cloaks from their dormitories and set 
off through the portrait hole (“Stand and fight, you 
yellow-bellied mongrels!”), down through the empty 
castle and out through the oak front doors. 

They made their way slowly down the lawn, making a 
shallow trench in the glittering, powdery snow, their 
socks and the hems of their cloaks soaked and 
freezing. The Forbidden Forest looked as though it 
had been enchanted, each tree smattered with silver, 
and Hagrid’s cabin looked like an iced cake. 

Ron knocked, but there was no answer. 

“He’s not out, is he?” said Hermione, who was 
shivering under her cloak. 

Ron had his ear to the door. 

“There’s a weird noise,” he said. “Listen — is that 
Fang?” 

Harry and Hermione put their ears to the door too. 
From inside the cabin came a series of low, throbbing 
moans. 

“Think we’d better go and get someone?” said Ron 
nervously. 

“Hagrid!” called Harry, thumping the door. “Hagrid, 
are you in there?” 

There was a sound of heavy footsteps, then the door 
creaked open. Hagrid stood there with his eyes red 
and swollen, tears splashing down the front of his 
leather vest. 

“Yeh’ve heard?” he bellowed, and he flung himself 
onto Harry’s neck. 

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid being at least twice the size of a normal man, 
this was no laughing matter. Harry, about to collapse 
under Hagrid’s weight, was rescued by Ron and 
Hermione, who each seized Hagrid under an arm and 
heaved him back into the cabin. Hagrid allowed 
himself to be steered into a chair and slumped over 
the table, sobbing uncontrollably, his face glazed with 
tears that dripped down into his tangled beard. 

“Hagrid, what is it?” said Hermione, aghast. 

Harry spotted an official-looking letter lying open on 
the table. 

“What’s this, Hagrid?” 

Hagrid’s sobs redoubled, but he shoved the letter 
toward Harry, who picked it up and read aloud: 

Dear Mr. Hagrid, 

Further to our inquiry into the attack by a hippogriff on 
a student in your class, we have accepted the 
assurances of Professor Dumbledore that you bear no 
responsibility for the regrettable incident. 

“Well, that’s okay then, Hagrid!” said Ron, clapping 
Hagrid on the shoulder. But Hagrid continued to sob, 
and waved one of his gigantic hands, inviting Harry to 
read on. 

However, we must register our concern about the 
hippogriff in question. We have decided to uphold the 
official complaint of Mr. Lucius Malfoy, and this matter 
will therefore be taken to the Committee for the 
Disposal of Dangerous Creatures. The hearing will take 
place on April 20th, and we ask you to present 
yourself and your hippogriff at the Committee’s offices 



Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




in London on that date. In the meantime, the hippogriff 
should be kept tethered and isolated. 

Yours in fellowship ... 

There followed a list of the school governors. 

“Oh,” said Ron. “But you said Buckbeak isn’t a bad 
hippogriff, Hagrid. I bet he’ll get off — ” 

“Yeh don’ know them gargoyles at the Committee fer 
the Disposal o’ Dangerous Creatures!” choked Hagrid, 
wiping his eyes on his sleeve. “They’ve got it in fer 
interestin’ creatures!” 

A sudden sound from the corner of Hagrid ’s cabin 
made Harry, Ron, and Hermione whip around. 
Buckbeak the hippogriff was lying in the corner, 
chomping on something that was oozing blood all over 
the floor. 

“I couldn’ leave him tied up out there in the snow!” 
choked Hagrid. “All on his own! At Christmas.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another. 

They had never seen eye to eye with Hagrid about 
what he called “interesting creatures” and other 
people called “terrifying monsters.” On the other 
hand, there didn’t seem to be any particular harm in 
Buckbeak. In fact, by Hagrid’s usual standards, he 
was positively cute. 

“You’ll have to put up a good strong defense, Hagrid,” 
said Hermione, sitting down and laying a hand on 
Hagrid’s massive forearm. “I’m sure you can prove 
Buckbeak is safe.” 



Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Won’t make no difference!” sobbed Hagrid. “Them 
Disposal devils, they’re all in Lucius Malfoy’s pocket! 
Scared o’ him! An’ if I lose the case, Buckbeak — ” 

Hagrid drew his finger swiftly across his throat, then 
gave a great wail and lurched forward, his face in his 
arms. 

“What about Dumbledore, Hagrid?” said Harry. 

“He’s done more’n enough fer me already,” groaned 
Hagrid. “Got enough on his plate what with keepin’ 
them dementors outta the castle, an’ Sirius Black 
lurkin’ around — ” 

Ron and Hermione looked quickly at Harry, as though 
expecting him to start berating Hagrid for not telling 
him the truth about Black. But Harry couldn’t bring 
himself to do it, not now that he saw Hagrid so 
miserable and scared. 

“Listen, Hagrid,” he said, “you can’t give up. 
Hermione’s right, you just need a good defense. You 
can call us as witnesses — ” 

“I’m sure I’ve read about a case of hippogriff-baiting,” 
said Hermione thoughtfully, “where the hippogriff got 
off. I’ll look it up for you, Hagrid, and see exactly what 
happened.” 

Hagrid howled still more loudly. Harry and Hermione 
looked at Ron to help them. 

“Er — shall I make a cup of tea?” said Ron. 

Harry stared at him. 

“It’s what my mum does whenever someone’s upset,” 
Ron muttered, shrugging. 

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




At last, after many more assurances of help, with a 
steaming mug of tea in front of him, Hagrid blew his 
nose on a handkerchief the size of a tablecloth and 
said, “Yer right. I can’ afford to go ter pieces. Gotta 
pull meself together. ...” 

Fang the boarhound came timidly out from under the 
table and laid his head on Hagrid ’s knee. 

“I’ve not bin meself lately,” said Hagrid, stroking Fang 
with one hand and mopping his face with the other. 
“Worried abou’ Buckbeak, an’ no one likin’ me classes 



“We do like them!” lied Hermione at once. 

“Yeah, they’re great!” said Ron, crossing his fingers 
under the table. “Er — how are the flobberworms?” 

“Dead,” said Hagrid gloomily. “Too much lettuce.” 

“Oh no!” said Ron, his lip twitching. 

“An’ them dementors make me feel ruddy terrible an’ 
all,” said Hagrid, with a sudden shudder. “Gotta walk 
past ’em ev’ry time I want a drink in the Three 
Broomsticks. ’S like bein’ back in Azkaban — ” 

He fell silent, gulping his tea. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione watched him breathlessly. They had never 
heard Hagrid talk about his brief spell in Azkaban 
before. After a pause, Hermione said timidly, “Is it 
awful in there, Hagrid?” 

“Yeh’ve no idea,” said Hagrid quietly. “Never bin 
anywhere like it. Thought I was goin’ mad. Kep’ goin’ 
over horrible stuff in me mind . . . the day I got 
expelled from Hogwarts . . . day me dad died . . . day I 
had ter let Norbert go. ...” 

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




His eyes filled with tears. Norbert was the baby 
dragon Hagrid had once won in a game of cards. 



“Yeh can’ really remember who yeh are after a while. 
An’ yeh can’ see the point o’ livin’ at all. I used ter 
hope I’d jus’ die in me sleep. ... When they let me out, 
it was like bein’ born again, ev’rythin’ came floodin’ 
back, it was the bes’ feelin’ in the world. Mind, the 
dementors weren’t keen on lettin’ me go.” 

“But you were innocent!” said Hermione. 

Hagrid snorted. 

“Think that matters to them? They don’ care. Long as 
they’ve got a couple o’ hundred humans stuck there 
with ’em, so they can leech all the happiness out of 
’em, they don’ give a damn who’s guilty an’ who’s 
not.” 

Hagrid went quiet for a moment, staring into his tea. 
Then he said quietly, “Thought o’ jus’ letting 
Buckbeak go ... tryin’ ter make him fly away ... but 
how d’yeh explain ter a hippogriff it’s gotta go inter 
hidin’? An’ — an’ I’m scared o’ breakin’ the law. ...” He 
looked up at them, tears leaking down his face again. 
“I don’ ever want ter go back ter Azkaban.” 

The trip to Hagrid’s, though far from fun, had 
nevertheless had the effect Ron and Hermione had 
hoped. Though Harry had by no means forgotten 
about Black, he couldn’t brood constantly on revenge 
if he wanted to help Hagrid win his case against the 
Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures. 
He, Ron, and Hermione went to the library the next 
day and returned to the empty common room laden 
with books that might help prepare a defense for 
Buckbeak. The three of them sat in front of the 
roaring fire, slowly turning the pages of dusty 
Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




volumes about famous cases of marauding beasts, 
speaking occasionally when they ran across 
something relevant. 

“Here’s something ... there was a case in 1722 ... but 
the hippogriff was convicted — ugh, look what they 
did to it, that’s disgusting — ” 

“This might help, look — a manticore savaged 
someone in 1296, and they let the manticore off — oh 
— no, that was only because everyone was too scared 
to go near it. ...” 

Meanwhile, in the rest of the castle, the usual 
magnificent Christmas decorations had been put up, 
despite the fact that hardly any of the students 
remained to enjoy them. Thick streamers of holly and 
mistletoe were strung along the corridors, mysterious 
lights shone from inside every suit of armor, and the 
Great Hall was filled with its usual twelve Christmas 
trees, glittering with golden stars. A powerful and 
delicious smell of cooking pervaded the corridors, and 
by Christmas Eve, it had grown so strong that even 
Scabbers poked his nose out of the shelter of Ron’s 
pocket to sniff hopefully at the air. 

On Christmas morning, Harry was woken by Ron 
throwing his pillow at him. 

“Oy! Presents!” 

Harry reached for his glasses and put them on, 
squinting through the semi-darkness to the foot of his 
bed, where a small heap of parcels had appeared. Ron 
was already ripping the paper off his own presents. 

“Another sweater from Mum . . . maroon again . . . see if 
you’ve got one.” 



Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had. Mrs. Weasley had sent him a scarlet 
sweater with the Gryffindor lion knitted on the front, 
also a dozen home-baked mince pies, some Christmas 
cake, and a box of nut brittle. As he moved all these 
things aside, he saw a long, thin package lying 
underneath. 

“What’s that?” said Ron, looking over, a freshly 
unwrapped pair of maroon socks in his hand. 

“Dunno ...” 

Harry ripped the parcel open and gasped as a 
magnificent, gleaming broomstick rolled out onto his 
bedspread. Ron dropped his socks and jumped off his 
bed for a closer look. 

“I don’t believe it,” he said hoarsely. 

It was a Firebolt, identical to the dream broom Harry 
had gone to see every day in Diagon Alley. Its handle 
glittered as he picked it up. He could feel it vibrating 
and let go; it hung in midair, unsupported, at exactly 
the right height for him to mount it. His eyes moved 
from the golden registration number at the top of the 
handle, right down to the perfectly smooth, 
streamlined birch twigs that made up the tail. 

“Who sent it to you?” said Ron in a hushed voice. 

“Look and see if there’s a card,” said Harry. 

Ron ripped apart the Firebolt’s wrappings. 

“Nothing! Blimey, who’d spend that much on you?” 

“Well,” said Harry, feeling stunned, “I’m betting it 
wasn’t the Dursleys.” 



Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I bet it was Dumbledore,” said Ron, now walking 
around and around the Firebolt, taking in every 
glorious inch. “He sent you the Invisibility Cloak 
anonymously. ...” 

“That was my dad’s, though,” said Harry. 
“Dumbledore was just passing it on to me. He 
wouldn’t spend hundreds of Galleons on me. He can’t 
go giving students stuff like this — ” 

“That’s why he wouldn’t say it was from him!” said 
Ron. “In case some git like Malfoy said it was 
favoritism. Hey, Harry” — Ron gave a great whoop of 
laughter — “Malfoyl Wait till he sees you on this! He’ll 
be sick as a pig! This is an international standard 
broom, this is!” 

“I can’t believe this,” Harry muttered, running a hand 
along the Firebolt, while Ron sank onto Harry’s bed, 
laughing his head off at the thought of Malfoy. “ Who 
— ?” 

“I know,” said Ron, controlling himself, “I know who it 
could’ve been — Lupin!” 

“What?” said Harry, now starting to laugh himself. 
“Lupin? Listen, if he had this much gold, he’d be able 
to buy himself some new robes.” 

“Yeah, but he likes you,” said Ron. “And he was away 
when your Nimbus got smashed, and he might’ve 
heard about it and decided to visit Diagon Alley and 
get this for you — ” 

“What d’you mean, he was away?” said Harry. “He 
was ill when I was playing in that match.” 



Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, he wasn’t in the hospital wing,” said Ron. “I 
was there, cleaning out the bedpans on that detention 
from Snape, remember?” 

Harry frowned at Ron. 

“I can’t see Lupin affording something like this.” 

“What ’re you two laughing about?” 

Hermione had just come in, wearing her dressing 
gown and carrying Crookshanks, who was looking 
very grumpy, with a string of tinsel tied around his 
neck. 

“Don’t bring him in here!” said Ron, hurriedly 
snatching Scabbers from the depths of his bed and 
stowing him in his pajama pocket. But Hermione 
wasn’t listening. She dropped Crookshanks onto 
Seamus’s empty bed and stared, open-mouthed, at 
the Firebolt. 

“Oh, Harry\ Who sent you that?” 

“No idea,” said Harry. “There wasn’t a card or 
anything with it.” 

To his great surprise, Hermione did not appear either 
excited or intrigued by the news. On the contrary, her 
face fell, and she bit her lip. 

“What’s the matter with you?” said Ron. 

“I don’t know,” said Hermione slowly, “but it’s a bit 
odd, isn’t it? I mean, this is supposed to be quite a 
good broom, isn’t it?” 

Ron sighed exasperatedly. 



Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s the best broom there is, Hermione,” he said. 

“So it must’ve been really expensive. ...” 

“Probably cost more than all the Slytherins’ brooms 
put together,” said Ron happily. 

“Well ... who’d send Harry something as expensive as 
that, and not even tell him they’d sent it?” said 
Hermione. 

“Who cares?” said Ron impatiently. “Listen, Harry, 
can I have a go on it? Can I?” 

“I don’t think anyone should ride that broom just yet!” 
said Hermione shrilly. 

Harry and Ron looked at her. 

“What d’you think Harry’s going to do with it — sweep 
the floor?” said Ron. 

But before Hermione could answer, Crookshanks 
sprang from Seamus’s bed, right at Ron’s chest. 

“GET — HIM — OUT — OF — HERE!” Ron bellowed 
as Crookshanks ’s claws ripped his pajamas and 
Scabbers attempted a wild escape over his shoulder. 
Ron seized Scabbers by the tail and aimed a 
misjudged kick at Crookshanks that hit the trunk at 
the end of Harry’s bed, knocking it over and causing 
Ron to hop up and down, howling with pain. 

Crookshanks ’s fur suddenly stood on end. A shrill, 
tinny whistling was filling the room. The Pocket 
Sneakoscope had become dislodged from Uncle 
Vernon’s old socks and was whirling and gleaming on 
the floor. 



Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I forgot about that!” Harry said, bending down and 
picking up the Sneakoscope. “I never wear those 
socks if I can help it. ...” 

The Sneakoscope whirled and whistled in his palm. 
Crookshanks was hissing and spitting at it. 

“You’d better take that cat out of here, Hermione,” 
said Ron furiously, sitting on Harry’s bed nursing his 
toe. “Can’t you shut that thing up?” he added to 
Harry as Hermione strode out of the room, 
Crookshanks ’s yellow eyes still fixed maliciously on 
Ron. 

Harry stuffed the Sneakoscope back inside the socks 
and threw it back into his trunk. All that could be 
heard now were Ron’s stifled moans of pain and rage. 
Scabbers was huddled in Ron’s hands. It had been a 
while since Harry had seen him out of Ron’s pocket, 
and he was unpleasantly surprised to see that 
Scabbers, once so fat, was now very skinny; patches 
of fur seemed to have fallen out too. 

“He’s not looking too good, is he?” Harry said. 

“It’s stress!” said Ron. “He’d be fine if that big stupid 
furball left him alone!” 

But Harry, remembering what the woman at the 
Magical Menagerie had said about rats living only 
three years, couldn’t help feeling that unless Scabbers 
had powers he had never revealed, he was reaching 
the end of his life. And despite Ron’s frequent 
complaints that Scabbers was both boring and 
useless, he was sure Ron would be very miserable if 
Scabbers died. 

Christmas spirit was definitely thin on the ground in 
the Gryffindor common room that morning. Hermione 

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




had shut Crookshanks in her dormitory, but was 
furious with Ron for trying to kick him; Ron was still 
fuming about Crookshanks ’s fresh attempt to eat 
Scabbers. Harry gave up trying to make them talk to 
each other and devoted himself to examining the 
Firebolt, which he had brought down to the common 
room with him. For some reason this seemed to 
annoy Hermione as well; she didn’t say anything, but 
she kept looking darkly at the broom as though it too 
had been criticizing her cat. 

At lunchtime they went down to the Great Hall, to 
find that the House tables had been moved against 
the walls again, and that a single table, set for twelve, 
stood in the middle of the room. Professors 
Dumbledore, McGonagall, Snape, Sprout, and 
Flitwick were there, along with Filch, the caretaker, 
who had taken off his usual brown coat and was 
wearing a very old and rather moldy-looking tailcoat. 
There were only three other students, two extremely 
nervous-looking first years and a sullen-faced 
Slytherin fifth year. 

“Merry Christmas!” said Dumbledore as Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione approached the table. “As there are so 
few of us, it seemed foolish to use the House tables. 

... Sit down, sit down!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat down side by side at 
the end of the table. 

“Crackers!” said Dumbledore enthusiastically, offering 
the end of a large silver noisemaker to Snape, who 
took it reluctantly and tugged. With a bang like a 
gunshot, the cracker flew apart to reveal a large, 
pointed witch’s hat topped with a stuffed vulture. 

Harry, remembering the boggart, caught Ron’s eye 
and they both grinned; Snape ’s mouth thinned and 

Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




he pushed the hat toward Dumbledore, who swapped 
it for his wizard’s hat at once. 



“Dig in!” he advised the table, beaming around. 

As Harry was helping himself to roast potatoes, the 
doors of the Great Hall opened again. It was Professor 
Trelawney, gliding toward them as though on wheels. 
She had put on a green sequined dress in honor of 
the occasion, making her look more than ever like a 
glittering, oversized dragonfly. 

“Sibyll, this is a pleasant surprise!” said Dumbledore, 
standing up. 

“I have been crystal gazing, Headmaster,” said 
Professor Trelawney in her mistiest, most faraway 
voice, “and to my astonishment, I saw myself 
abandoning my solitary luncheon and coming to join 
you. Who am I to refuse the promptings of fate? I at 
once hastened from my tower, and I do beg you to 
forgive my lateness. ...” 

“Certainly, certainly,” said Dumbledore, his eyes 
twinkling. “Let me draw you up a chair — ” 

And he did indeed draw a chair in midair with his 
wand, which revolved for a few seconds before falling 
with a thud between Professors Snape and 
McGonagall. Professor Trelawney, however, did not sit 
down; her enormous eyes had been roving around the 
table, and she suddenly uttered a kind of soft scream. 

“I dare not, Headmaster! If I join the table, we shall be 
thirteen! Nothing could be more unlucky! Never forget 
that when thirteen dine together, the first to rise will 
be the first to die!” 



Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well risk it, Sibyll,” said Professor McGonagall 
impatiently. “Do sit down, the turkey’s getting stone 
cold.” 



Professor Trelawney hesitated, then lowered herself 
into the empty chair, eyes shut and mouth clenched 
tight, as though expecting a thunderbolt to hit the 
table. Professor McGonagall poked a large spoon into 
the nearest tureen. 

“Tripe, Sibyll?” 

Professor Trelawney ignored her. Eyes open again, 
she looked around once more and said, “But where is 
dear Professor Lupin?” 

“I’m afraid the poor fellow is ill again,” said 
Dumbledore, indicating that everybody should start 
serving themselves. “Most unfortunate that it should 
happen on Christmas Day.” 

“But surely you already knew that, Sibyll?” said 
Professor McGonagall, her eyebrows raised. 

Professor Trelawney gave Professor McGonagall a very 
cold look. 

“Certainly I knew, Minerva,” she said quietly. “But 
one does not parade the fact that one is All-Knowing. 

I frequently act as though I am not possessed of the 
Inner Eye, so as not to make others nervous.” 

“That explains a great deal,” said Professor 
McGonagall tartly. 

Professor Trelawney’s voice suddenly became a good 
deal less misty. 



Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“If you must know, Minerva, I have seen that poor 
Professor Lupin will not be with us for very long. He 
seems aware, himself, that his time is short. He 
positively fled when I offered to crystal gaze for him — 



“Imagine that,” said Professor McGonagall dryly. 

“I doubt,” said Dumbledore, in a cheerful but slightly 
raised voice, which put an end to Professor 
McGonagall and Professor Trelawney’s conversation, 
“that Professor Lupin is in any immediate danger. 
Severus, you’ve made the potion for him again?” 

“Yes, Headmaster,” said Snape. 

“Good,” said Dumbledore. “Then he should be up and 
about in no time. ... Derek, have you had any of these 
chipolatas? They’re excellent.” 

The first-year boy went furiously red on being 
addressed directly by Dumbledore, and took the 
platter of sausages with trembling hands. 

Professor Trelawney behaved almost normally until 
the very end of Christmas dinner, two hours later. 

Full to bursting with Christmas dinner and still 
wearing their party hats, Harry and Ron got up first 
from the table and she shrieked loudly. 

“My dears! Which of you left his seat first? Which?” 

“Dunno,” said Ron, looking uneasily at Harry. 

“I doubt it will make much difference,” said Professor 
McGonagall coldly, “unless a mad axe-man is waiting 
outside the doors to slaughter the first into the 
entrance hall.” 



Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Even Ron laughed. Professor Trelawney looked highly 
affronted. 

“Coming?” Harry said to Hermione. 

“No,” Hermione muttered, “I want a quick word with 
Professor McGonagall.” 

“Probably trying to see if she can take any more 
classes,” yawned Ron as they made their way into the 
entrance hall, which was completely devoid of mad 
axe-men. 

When they reached the portrait hole, they found Sir 
Cadogan enjoying a Christmas party with a couple of 
monks, several previous headmasters of Hogwarts, 
and his fat pony. He pushed up his visor and toasted 
them with a flagon of mead. 

“Merry — hie — Christmas! Password?” 

“Scurvy cur,” said Ron. 

“And the same to you, sir!” roared Sir Cadogan as the 
painting swung forward to admit them. 

Harry went straight up to the dormitory, collected the 
Firebolt and the Broomstick Servicing Kit Hermione 
had given him for his birthday, brought them 
downstairs, and tried to find something to do to the 
Firebolt; however, there were no bent twigs to clip, 
and the handle was so shiny already it seemed 
pointless to polish it. He and Ron simply sat admiring 
it from every angle until the portrait hole opened, and 
Hermione came in, accompanied by Professor 
McGonagall. 

Though Professor McGonagall was head of Gryffindor 
House, Harry had seen her in the common room only 

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




once before, and that had been to make a very grave 
announcement. He and Ron stared at her, both 
holding the Firebolt. Hermione walked around them, 
sat down, picked up the nearest book, and hid her 
face behind it. 

“So that’s it, is it?” said Professor McGonagall beadily, 
walking over to the fireside and staring at the 
Firebolt. “Miss Granger has just informed me that you 
have been sent a broomstick, Potter.” 

Harry and Ron looked around at Hermione. They 
could see her forehead reddening over the top of her 
book, which was upside down. 

“May I?” said Professor McGonagall, but she didn’t 
wait for an answer before pulling the Firebolt out of 
their hands. She examined it carefully from handle to 
twig-ends. “Hmm. And there was no note at all, 

Potter? No card? No message of any kind?” 

“No,” said Harry blankly. 

“I see ... ,” said Professor McGonagall. “Well, I’m 
afraid I will have to take this, Potter.” 

“W — what?” said Harry, scrambling to his feet. 
“Why?” 

“It will need to be checked for jinxes,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “Of course, I’m no expert, but I daresay 
Madam Hooch and Professor Flitwick will strip it 
down — ” 

“Strip it down?” repeated Ron, as though Professor 
McGonagall was mad. 



Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It shouldn’t take more than a few weeks,” said 
Professor McGonagall. “You will have it back if we are 
sure it is jinx-free.” 

“There’s nothing wrong with it!” said Harry, his voice 
shaking slightly. “Honestly, Professor — ” 

“You can’t know that, Potter,” said Professor 
McGonagall, quite kindly, “not until you’ve flown it, at 
any rate, and I’m afraid that is out of the question 
until we are certain that it has not been tampered 
with. I shall keep you informed.” 

Professor McGonagall turned on her heel and carried 
the Firebolt out of the portrait hole, which closed 
behind her. Harry stood staring after her, the tin of 
High-Finish Polish still clutched in his hands. Ron, 
however, rounded on Hermione. 

“What did you go running to McGonagall for?” 

Hermione threw her book aside. She was still pink in 
the face, but stood up and faced Ron defiantly. 

“Because I thought — and Professor McGonagall 
agrees with me — that that broom was probably sent 
to Harry by Sirius Black!” 



Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





THE PATRONUS 

Harry knew that Hermione had meant well, but that 
didn’t stop him from being angry with her. He had 
been the owner of the best broom in the world for a 
few short hours, and now, because of her 
interference, he didn’t know whether he would ever 
see it again. He was positive that there was nothing 
wrong with the Firebolt now, but what sort of state 
would it be in once it had been subjected to all sorts 
of anti-jinx tests? 

Ron was furious with Hermione too. As far as he was 
concerned, the stripping-down of a brand-new 
Firebolt was nothing less than criminal damage. 
Hermione, who remained convinced that she had 
acted for the best, started avoiding the common room. 
Harry and Ron supposed she had taken refuge in the 
library and didn’t try to persuade her to come back. 
All in all, they were glad when the rest of the school 
returned shortly after New Year, and Gryffindor Tower 
became crowded and noisy again. 



Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Wood sought Harry out on the night before term 
started. 



“Had a good Christmas?” he said, and then, without 
waiting for an answer, he sat down, lowered his voice, 
and said, “I’ve been doing some thinking over 
Christmas, Harry. After the last match, you know. If 
the dementors come to the next one ... I mean . . . we 
can’t afford you to — well — ” 

Wood broke off, looking awkward. 

“I’m working on it,” said Harry quickly. “Professor 
Lupin said he’d train me to ward off the dementors. 
We should be starting this week. He said he’d have 
time after Christmas.” 

“Ah,” said Wood, his expression clearing. “Well, in 
that case — I really didn’t want to lose you as Seeker, 
Harry. And have you ordered a new broom yet?” 

“No,” said Harry. 

“What! You’d better get a move on, you know — you 
can’t ride that Shooting Star against Ravenclaw!” 

“He got a Firebolt for Christmas,” said Ron. 

“A Firebolt? No! Seriously? A — a real Firebolt?” 

“Don’t get excited, Oliver,” said Harry gloomily. “I 
haven’t got it anymore. It was confiscated.” And he 
explained all about how the Firebolt was now being 
checked for jinxes. 

“Jinxed? How could it be jinxed?” 



Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sirius Black,” Harry said wearily. “He’s supposed to 
be after me. So McGonagall reckons he might have 
sent it.” 

Waving aside the information that a famous murderer 
was after his Seeker, Wood said, “But Black couldn’t 
have bought a Firebolt! He’s on the run! The whole 
country’s on the lookout for him! How could he just 
walk into Quality Quidditch Supplies and buy a 
broomstick?” 

“I know,” said Harry, “but McGonagall still wants to 
strip it down — ” 

Wood went pale. 

“I’ll go and talk to her, Harry,” he promised. “I’ll make 
her see reason. ... A Firebolt ... a real Firebolt, on our 
team . . . She wants Gryffindor to win as much as we 
do. ... I’ll make her see sense. A Firebolt ...” 

Classes started again the next day. The last thing 
anyone felt like doing was spending two hours on the 
grounds on a raw January morning, but Hagrid had 
provided a bonfire full of salamanders for their 
enjoyment, and they spent an unusually good lesson 
collecting dry wood and leaves to keep the fire blazing 
while the flame-loving lizards scampered up and 
down the crumbling, white-hot logs. The first 
Divination lesson of the new term was much less fun; 
Professor Trelawney was now teaching them 
palmistry, and she lost no time in informing Harry 
that he had the shortest life line she had ever seen. 

It was Defense Against the Dark Arts that Harry was 
keen to get to; after his conversation with Wood, he 
wanted to get started on his anti-dementor lessons as 
soon as possible. 



Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah yes,” said Lupin, when Harry reminded him of his 
promise at the end of class. “Let me see ... how about 
eight o’clock on Thursday evening? The History of 
Magic classroom should be large enough. ... I’ll have 
to think carefully about how we’re going to do this. ... 
We can’t bring a real dementor into the castle to 
practice on. ...” 

“Still looks ill, doesn’t he?” said Ron as they walked 
down the corridor, heading to dinner. “What d’you 
reckon ’s the matter with him?” 

There was a loud and impatient “tuh” from behind 
them. It was Hermione, who had been sitting at the 
feet of a suit of armor, repacking her bag, which was 
so full of books it wouldn’t close. 

“And what are you tutting at us for?” said Ron 
irritably. 

“Nothing,” said Hermione in a lofty voice, heaving her 
bag back over her shoulder. 

“Yes, you were,” said Ron. “I said I wonder what’s 
wrong with Lupin, and you — ” 

“Well, isn’t it obvious?” said Hermione, with a look of 
maddening superiority. 

“If you don’t want to tell us, don’t,” snapped Ron. 

“Fine,” said Hermione haughtily, and she marched off. 

“She doesn’t know,” said Ron, staring resentfully after 
Hermione. “She’s just trying to get us to talk to her 
again.” 

At eight o’clock on Thursday evening, Harry left 
Gryffindor Tower for the History of Magic classroom. 

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It was dark and empty when he arrived, but he lit the 
lamps with his wand and had waited only five 
minutes when Professor Lupin turned up, carrying a 
large packing case, which he heaved onto Professor 
Binns’ desk. 

“What’s that?” said Harry. 

“Another boggart,” said Lupin, stripping off his cloak. 
“I’ve been combing the castle ever since Tuesday, and 
very luckily, I found this one lurking inside Mr. Filch’s 
filing cabinet. It’s the nearest we’ll get to a real 
dementor. The boggart will turn into a dementor when 
he sees you, so we’ll be able to practice on him. I can 
store him in my office when we’re not using him; 
there’s a cupboard under my desk he’ll like.” 

“Okay,” said Harry, trying to sound as though he 
wasn’t apprehensive at all and merely glad that Lupin 
had found such a good substitute for a real dementor. 

“So ...” Professor Lupin had taken out his own wand, 
and indicated that Harry should do the same. “The 
spell I am going to try and teach you is highly 
advanced magic, Harry — well beyond Ordinary 
Wizarding Level. It is called the Patronus Charm.” 

“How does it work?” said Harry nervously. 

“Well, when it works correctly, it conjures up a 
Patronus,” said Lupin, “which is a kind of anti- 
dementor — a guardian that acts as a shield between 
you and the dementor.” 

Harry had a sudden vision of himself crouching 
behind a Hagrid-sized figure holding a large club. 
Professor Lupin continued, “The Patronus is a kind of 
positive force, a projection of the very things that the 
dementor feeds upon — hope, happiness, the desire 
Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




to survive — but it cannot feel despair, as real 
humans can, so the dementors can’t hurt it. But I 
must warn you, Harry, that the charm might be too 
advanced for you. Many qualified wizards have 
difficulty with it.” 

“What does a Patronus look like?” said Harry 
curiously. 

“Each one is unique to the wizard who conjures it.” 
“And how do you conjure it?” 

“With an incantation, which will work only if you are 
concentrating, with all your might, on a single, very 
happy memory.” 

Harry cast his mind about for a happy memory. 
Certainly, nothing that had happened to him at the 
Dursleys’ was going to do. Finally, he settled on the 
moment when he had first ridden a broomstick. 

“Right,” he said, trying to recall as exactly as possible 
the wonderful, soaring sensation of his stomach. 

“The incantation is this — ” Lupin cleared his throat. 
“Expecto patronum).” 

“Expecto patronum,” Harry repeated under his breath, 
“expecto patronum.” 

“Concentrating hard on your happy memory?” 

“Oh — yeah — ” said Harry, quickly forcing his 
thoughts back to that first broom ride. “Expecto 
patrono — no, patronum — sorry — expecto patronum, 
expecto patronum — ” 



Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Something whooshed suddenly out of the end of his 
wand; it looked like a wisp of silvery gas. 



“Did you see that?” said Harry excitedly. “Something 
happened!” 

“Very good,” said Lupin, smiling. “Right, then — ready 
to try it on a dementor?” 

“Yes,” Harry said, gripping his wand very tightly, and 
moving into the middle of the deserted classroom. He 
tried to keep his mind on flying, but something else 
kept intruding. . . . Any second now, he might hear his 
mother again . . . but he shouldn’t think that, or he 
would hear her again, and he didn’t want to ... or did 
he? 

Lupin grasped the lid of the packing case and pulled. 

A dementor rose slowly from the box, its hooded face 
turned toward Harry, one glistening, scabbed hand 
gripping its cloak. The lamps around the classroom 
flickered and went out. The dementor stepped from 
the box and started to sweep silently toward Harry, 
drawing a deep, rattling breath. A wave of piercing 
cold broke over him — 

“Expecto patronurrd” Harry yelled. “Expecto patronum). 
Expecto — ” 

But the classroom and the dementor were dissolving. 

. . . Harry was falling again through thick white fog, 
and his mother’s voice was louder than ever, echoing 
inside his head — “ Not Harry\ Not Harry\ Please — I’ll 
do anything — ” 

“Stand aside. Stand aside, girl\” 

“Harry!” 

Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry jerked back to life. He was lying flat on his back 
on the floor. The classroom lamps were alight again. 
He didn’t have to ask what had happened. 

“Sorry,” he muttered, sitting up and feeling cold sweat 
trickling down behind his glasses. 

“Are you all right?” said Lupin. 

“Yes ...” Harry pulled himself up on one of the desks 
and leaned against it. 

“Here — ” Lupin handed him a Chocolate Frog. “Eat 
this before we try again. I didn’t expect you to do it 
your first time; in fact, I would have been astounded if 
you had.” 

“It’s getting worse,” Harry muttered, biting off the 
Frog’s head. “I could hear her louder that time — and 
him — Voldemort — ” 

Lupin looked paler than usual. 

“Harry, if you don’t want to continue, I will more than 
understand — ” 

“I do!” said Harry fiercely, stuffing the rest of the 
Chocolate Frog into his mouth. “I’ve got to! What if 
the dementors turn up at our match against 
Ravenclaw? I can’t afford to fall off again. If we lose 
this game we’ve lost the Quidditch Cup!” 

“All right then ... ,” said Lupin. “You might want to 
select another memory, a happy memory, I mean, to 
concentrate on. ... That one doesn’t seem to have 
been strong enough. ...” 

Harry thought hard and decided his feelings when 
Gryffindor had won the House Championship last 

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




year had definitely qualified as very happy. He 
gripped his wand tightly again and took up his 
position in the middle of the classroom. 

“Ready?” said Lupin, gripping the box lid. 

“Ready,” said Harry, trying hard to fill his head with 
happy thoughts about Gryffindor winning, and not 
dark thoughts about what was going to happen when 
the box opened. 

“Go!” said Lupin, pulling off the lid. The room went 
icily cold and dark once more. The dementor glided 
forward, drawing its breath; one rotting hand was 
extending toward Harry — 

“Expecto patronum).” Harry yelled. “Expecto patronuml 
Expecto pat — ” 

White fog obscured his senses . . . big, blurred shapes 
were moving around him ... then came a new voice, a 
man’s voice, shouting, panicking — 

“Lily, take Harry and go\ It’s him\ Go! Run\ I’ll hold him 

off~ 

The sounds of someone stumbling from a room — a 
door bursting open — a cackle of high-pitched 
laughter — 

“Harry! Harry ... wake up. ...” 

Lupin was tapping Harry hard on the face. This time 
it was a minute before Harry understood why he was 
lying on a dusty classroom floor. 

“I heard my dad,” Harry mumbled. “That’s the first 
time I’ve ever heard him — he tried to take on 



Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort himself, to give my mum time to run for it. 



Harry suddenly realized that there were tears on his 
face mingling with the sweat. He bent his face as low 
as possible, wiping them off on his robes, pretending 
to do up his shoelace, so that Lupin wouldn’t see. 

“You heard James?” said Lupin in a strange voice. 

“Yeah ...” Face dry, Harry looked up. “Why — you 
didn’t know my dad, did you?” 

“I — I did, as a matter of fact,” said Lupin. “We were 
friends at Hogwarts. Listen, Harry — perhaps we 
should leave it here for tonight. This charm is 
ridiculously advanced. ... I shouldn’t have suggested 
putting you through this. ...” 

“No!” said Harry. He got up again. “I’ll have one more 
go! I’m not thinking of happy enough things, that’s 
what it is. ... Hang on. ...” 

He racked his brains. A really, really happy memory 
. . . one that he could turn into a good, strong 
Patronus ... 

The moment when he’d first found out he was a 
wizard, and would be leaving the Dursleys for 
Hogwarts! If that wasn’t a happy memory, he didn’t 
know what was. ... Concentrating very hard on how 
he had felt when he’d realized he’d be leaving Privet 
Drive, Harry got to his feet and faced the packing case 
once more. 

“Ready?” said Lupin, who looked as though he were 
doing this against his better judgment. 

“Concentrating hard? All right — go!” 



Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He pulled off the lid of the case for the third time, and 
the dementor rose out of it; the room fell cold and 
dark — 

“EXPECTO PATRONUM ” Harry bellowed. “ EXPECTO 
PATRONUM EXPECTO PATRONUM ” 

The screaming inside Harry’s head had started again 
— except this time, it sounded as though it were 
coming from a badly tuned radio — softer and louder 
and softer again — and he could still see the 
dementor — it had halted — and then a huge, silver 
shadow came bursting out of the end of Harry’s wand, 
to hover between him and the dementor, and though 
Harry’s legs felt like water, he was still on his feet — 
though for how much longer, he wasn’t sure — 

“ RiddikulusV’ roared Lupin, springing forward. 

There was a loud crack, and Harry’s cloudy Patronus 
vanished along with the dementor; he sank into a 
chair, feeling as exhausted as if he’d just run a mile, 
and felt his legs shaking. Out of the corner of his eye, 
he saw Professor Lupin forcing the boggart back into 
the packing case with his wand; it had turned into a 
silvery orb again. 

“Excellent!” Lupin said, striding over to where Harry 
sat. “Excellent, Harry! That was definitely a start!” 

“Can we have another go? Just one more go?” 

“Not now,” said Lupin firmly. “You’ve had enough for 
one night. Here — ” 

He handed Harry a large bar of Honeydukes’ best 
chocolate. 



Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Eat the lot, or Madam Pomfrey will be after my blood. 
Same time next week?” 

“Okay,” said Harry. He took a bite of the chocolate 
and watched Lupin extinguishing the lamps that had 
rekindled with the disappearance of the dementor. A 
thought had just occurred to him. 

“Professor Lupin?” he said. “If you knew my dad, you 
must’ve known Sirius Black as well.” 

Lupin turned very quickly. 

“What gives you that idea?” he said sharply. 

“Nothing — I mean, I just knew they were friends at 
Hogwarts too. ...” 

Lupin’s face relaxed. 

“Yes, I knew him,” he said shortly. “Or I thought I did. 
You’d better be off, Harry, it’s getting late.” 

Harry left the classroom, walking along the corridor 
and around a corner, then took a detour behind a 
suit of armor and sank down on its plinth to finish 
his chocolate, wishing he hadn’t mentioned Black, as 
Lupin was obviously not keen on the subject. Then 
Harry’s thoughts wandered back to his mother and 
father. ... 

He felt drained and strangely empty, even though he 
was so full of chocolate. Terrible though it was to hear 
his parents’ last moments replayed inside his head, 
these were the only times Harry had heard their 
voices since he was a very small child. But he’d never 
be able to produce a proper Patronus if he half 
wanted to hear his parents again. ... 



Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“They’re dead,” he told himself sternly. “They’re dead 
and listening to echoes of them won’t bring them 
back. You’d better get a grip on yourself if you want 
that Quidditch Cup.” 

He stood up, crammed the last bit of chocolate into 
his mouth, and headed back to Gryffindor Tower. 

Ravenclaw played Slytherin a week after the start of 
term. Slytherin won, though narrowly. According to 
Wood, this was good news for Gryffindor, who would 
take second place if they beat Ravenclaw too. He 
therefore increased the number of team practices to 
five a week. This meant that with Lupin’s anti- 
dementor classes, which in themselves were more 
draining than six Quidditch practices, Harry had just 
one night a week to do all his homework. Even so, he 
wasn’t showing the strain nearly as much as 
Hermione, whose immense workload finally seemed to 
be getting to her. Every night, without fail, Hermione 
was to be seen in a corner of the common room, 
several tables spread with books, Arithmancy charts, 
rune dictionaries, diagrams of Muggles lifting heavy 
objects, and file upon file of extensive notes; she 
barely spoke to anybody and snapped when she was 
interrupted. 

“How’s she doing it?” Ron muttered to Harry one 
evening as Harry sat finishing a nasty essay on 
Undetectable Poisons for Snape. Harry looked up. 
Hermione was barely visible behind a tottering pile of 
books. 

“Doing what?” 

“Getting to all her classes!” Ron said. “I heard her 
talking to Professor Vector, that Arithmancy witch, 
this morning. They were going on about yesterday’s 
lesson, but Hermione can’t’ve been there, because she 

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




was with us in Care of Magical Creatures! And Ernie 
McMillan told me she’s never missed a Muggle 
Studies class, but half of them are at the same time 
as Divination, and she’s never missed one of them 
either!” 

Harry didn’t have time to fathom the mystery of 
Hermione’s impossible schedule at the moment; he 
really needed to get on with Snape’s essay. Two 
seconds later, however, he was interrupted again, this 
time by Wood. 

“Bad news, Harry. I’ve just been to see Professor 
McGonagall about the Firebolt. She — er — got a bit 
shirty with me. Told me I’d got my priorities wrong. 
Seemed to think I cared more about winning the Cup 
than I do about you staying alive. Just because I told 
her I didn’t care if it threw you off, as long as you 
caught the Snitch first.” Wood shook his head in 
disbelief. “Honestly, the way she was yelling at me . . . 
you’d think I’d said something terrible. ... Then I 
asked her how much longer she was going to keep it. 
...” He screwed up his face and imitated Professor 
McGonagall’s severe voice. “ ‘As long as necessary, 
Wood’ ... I reckon it’s time you ordered a new broom, 
Harry. There’s an order form at the back of Which 
Broomstick ... you could get a Nimbus Two Thousand 
and One, like Malfoy’s got.” 

“I’m not buying anything Malfoy thinks is good,” said 
Harry flatly. 

January faded imperceptibly into February, with no 
change in the bitterly cold weather. The match 
against Ravenclaw was drawing nearer and nearer, 
but Harry still hadn’t ordered a new broom. He was 
now asking Professor McGonagall for news of the 
Firebolt after every Transfiguration lesson, Ron 



Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




standing hopefully at his shoulder, Hermione rushing 
past with her face averted. 

“No, Potter, you can’t have it back yet,” Professor 
McGonagall told him the twelfth time this happened, 
before he’d even opened his mouth. “We’ve checked 
for most of the usual curses, but Professor Flitwick 
believes the broom might be carrying a Hurling Hex. I 
shall tell you once we’ve finished checking it. Now, 
please stop badgering me.” 

To make matters even worse, Harry’s anti-dementor 
lessons were not going nearly as well as he had 
hoped. Several sessions on, he was able to produce 
an indistinct, silvery shadow every time the boggart- 
dementor approached him, but his Patronus was too 
feeble to drive the dementor away. All it did was 
hover, like a semi-transparent cloud, draining Harry 
of energy as he fought to keep it there. Harry felt 
angry with himself, guilty about his secret desire to 
hear his parents’ voices again. 

“You’re expecting too much of yourself,” said 
Professor Lupin sternly in their fourth week of 
practice. “For a thirteen-year-old wizard, even an 
indistinct Patronus is a huge achievement. You aren’t 
passing out anymore, are you?” 

“I thought a Patronus would — charge the dementors 
down or something,” said Harry dispiritedly. “Make 
them disappear — ” 

“The true Patronus does do that,” said Lupin. “But 
you’ve achieved a great deal in a very short space of 
time. If the dementors put in an appearance at your 
next Quidditch match, you will be able to keep them 
at bay long enough to get back to the ground.” 



Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You said it’s harder if there are loads of them,” said 
Harry. 

“I have complete confidence in you,” said Lupin, 
smiling. “Here — you’ve earned a drink — something 
from the Three Broomsticks. You won’t have tried it 
before — ” 

He pulled two bottles out of his briefcase. 

“Butterbeer!” said Harry, without thinking. “Yeah, I 
like that stuff!” 

Lupin raised an eyebrow. 

“Oh — Ron and Hermione brought me some back 
from Hogsmeade,” Harry lied quickly. 

“I see,” said Lupin, though he still looked slightly 
suspicious. “Well — let’s drink to a Gryffindor victory 
against Ravenclaw! Not that I’m supposed to take 
sides, as a teacher ... ,” he added hastily. 

They drank the butterbeer in silence, until Harry 
voiced something he’d been wondering for a while. 

“What’s under a dementor’s hood?” 

Professor Lupin lowered his bottle thoughtfully. 

“Hmmm ... well, the only people who really know are 
in no condition to tell us. You see, the dementor 
lowers its hood only to use its last and worst 
weapon.” 

“What’s that?” 

“They call it the Dementor’s Kiss,” said Lupin, with a 
slightly twisted smile. “It’s what dementors do to 

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




those they wish to destroy utterly. I suppose there 
must be some kind of mouth under there, because 
they clamp their jaws upon the mouth of the victim 
and — and suck out his soul.” 

Harry accidentally spat out a bit of butterbeer. 

“What — they kill — ?” 

“Oh no,” said Lupin. “Much worse than that. You can 
exist without your soul, you know, as long as your 
brain and heart are still working. But you 11 have no 
sense of self anymore, no memory, no ... anything. 
There’s no chance at all of recovery. You’ll just — 
exist. As an empty shell. And your soul is gone forever 
... lost.” 

Lupin drank a little more butterbeer, then said, “It’s 
the fate that awaits Sirius Black. It was in the Daily 
Prophet this morning. The Ministry have given the 
dementors permission to perform it if they find him.” 

Harry sat stunned for a moment at the idea of 
someone having their soul sucked out through their 
mouth. But then he thought of Black. 

“He deserves it,” he said suddenly. 

“You think so?” said Lupin lightly. “Do you really 
think anyone deserves that?” 

“Yes,” said Harry defiantly. “For ... for some things ...” 

He would have liked to have told Lupin about the 
conversation he’d overheard about Black in the Three 
Broomsticks, about Black betraying his mother and 
father, but it would have involved revealing that he’d 
gone to Hogsmeade without permission, and he knew 
Lupin wouldn’t be very impressed by that. So he 
Page | 275 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




finished his butterbeer, thanked Lupin, and left the 
History of Magic classroom. 

Harry half wished that he hadn’t asked what was 
under a dementor’s hood, the answer had been so 
horrible, and he was so lost in unpleasant thoughts of 
what it would feel like to have your soul sucked out of 
you that he walked headlong into Professor 
McGonagall halfway up the stairs. 

“Do watch where you’re going, Potter!” 

“Sorry, Professor — ” 

“I’ve just been looking for you in the Gryffindor 
common room. Well, here it is, we’ve done everything 
we could think of, and there doesn’t seem to be 
anything wrong with it at all. You’ve got a very good 
friend somewhere, Potter. ...” 

Harry’s jaw dropped. She was holding out his 
Firebolt, and it looked as magnificent as ever. 

“I can have it back?” Harry said weakly. “Seriously?” 

“Seriously,” said Professor McGonagall, and she was 
actually smiling. “I daresay you’ll need to get the feel 
of it before Saturday’s match, won’t you? And Potter 
— do try and win, won’t you? Or we’ll be out of the 
running for the eighth year in a row, as Professor 
Snape was kind enough to remind me only last night. 



Speechless, Harry carried the Firebolt back upstairs 
toward Gryffindor Tower. As he turned a corner, he 
saw Ron dashing toward him, grinning from ear to 
ear. 



Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“She gave it to you? Excellent! Listen, can I still have 
a go on it? Tomorrow?” 

“Yeah ... anything ... said Harry, his heart lighter 
than it had been in a month. “You know what — we 
should make up with Hermione. ... She was only 
trying to help. ...” 

“Yeah, all right,” said Ron. “She’s in the common 
room now — working, for a change — ” 

They turned into the corridor to Gryffindor Tower and 
saw Neville Longbottom, pleading with Sir Cadogan, 
who seemed to be refusing him entrance. 

“I wrote them down!” Neville was saying tearfully. 

“But I must’ve dropped them somewhere!” 

“A likely tale!” roared Sir Cadogan. Then, spotting 
Harry and Ron: “Good even, my fine young yeomen! 
Come clap this loon in irons. He is trying to force 
entry to the chambers within!” 

“Oh, shut up,” said Ron as he and Harry drew level 
with Neville. 

“I’ve lost the passwords!” Neville told them miserably. 
“I made him tell me what passwords he was going to 
use this week, because he keeps changing them, and 
now I don’t know what I’ve done with them!” 

“Oddsbodikins,” said Harry to Sir Cadogan, who 
looked extremely disappointed and reluctantly swung 
forward to let them into the common room. There was 
a sudden, excited murmur as every head turned and 
the next moment, Harry was surrounded by people 
exclaiming over his Firebolt. 

“Where ’d you get it, Harry?” 

Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Will you let me have a go?” 

“Have you ridden it yet, Harry?” 

“Ravenclaw’ll have no chance, they’re all on 
Cleansweep Sevens!” 

“Can I just hold it, Harry?” 

After ten minutes or so, during which the Firebolt was 
passed around and admired from every angle, the 
crowd dispersed and Harry and Ron had a clear view 
of Hermione, the only person who hadn’t rushed over 
to them, bent over her work and carefully avoiding 
their eyes. Harry and Ron approached her table and 
at last, she looked up. 

“I got it back,” said Harry, grinning at her and holding 
up the Firebolt. 

“See, Hermione? There wasn’t anything wrong with 
it!” said Ron. 

“Well — there might have been!” said Hermione. “I 
mean, at least you know now that it’s safe!” 

“Yeah, I suppose so,” said Harry. “I’d better put it 
upstairs — ” 

“I’ll take it!” said Ron eagerly. “I’ve got to give 
Scabbers his rat tonic.” 

He took the Firebolt and, holding it as if it were made 
of glass, carried it away up the boys’ staircase. 

“Can I sit down, then?” Harry asked Hermione. 

“I suppose so,” said Hermione, moving a great stack 
of parchment off a chair. 

Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry looked around at the cluttered table, at the 
long Arithmancy essay on which the ink was still 
glistening, at the even longer Muggle Studies essay 
(“Explain Why Muggles Need Electricity”) and at the 
rune translation Hermione was now poring over. 

“How are you getting through all this stuff?” Harry 
asked her. 

“Oh, well — you know — working hard,” said 
Hermione. Close-up, Harry saw that she looked 
almost as tired as Lupin. 

“Why don’t you just drop a couple of subjects?” Harry 
asked, watching her lifting books as she searched for 
her rune dictionary. 

“I couldn’t do that!” said Hermione, looking 
scandalized. 

“Arithmancy looks terrible,” said Harry, picking up a 
very complicated-looking number chart. 

“Oh no, it’s wonderful!” said Hermione earnestly. “It’s 
my favorite subject! It’s — ” 

But exactly what was wonderful about Arithmancy, 
Harry never found out. At that precise moment, a 
strangled yell echoed down the boys’ staircase. The 
whole common room fell silent, staring, petrified, at 
the entrance. Then came hurried footsteps, growing 
louder and louder — and then Ron came leaping into 
view, dragging with him a bedsheet. 

“LOOK!” he bellowed, striding over to Hermione’s 
table. “LOOK!” he yelled, shaking the sheets in her 
face. 

“Ron, what — ?” 

Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“SCABBERS! LOOK! SCABBERS!” 



Hermione was leaning away from Ron, looking utterly 
bewildered. Harry looked down at the sheet Ron was 
holding. There was something red on it. Something 
that looked horribly like — 

“BLOOD!” Ron yelled into the stunned silence. “HE’S 
GONE! AND YOU KNOW WHAT WAS ON THE 
FLOOR?” 

“N — no,” said Hermione in a trembling voice. 

Ron threw something down onto Hermione ’s rune 
translation. Hermione and Harry leaned forward. 
Lying on top of the weird, spiky shapes were several 
long, ginger cat hairs. 



Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






GRYFFINDOR VERSUS RAVENCLAW 

It looked like the end of Ron and Hermione’s 
friendship. Each was so angry with the other that 
Harry couldn’t see how they’d ever make up. 

Ron was enraged that Hermione had never taken 
Crookshanks’s attempts to eat Scabbers seriously, 
hadn’t bothered to keep a close enough watch on him, 
and was still trying to pretend that Crookshanks was 
innocent by suggesting that Ron look for Scabbers 
under all the boys’ beds. Hermione, meanwhile, 
maintained fiercely that Ron had no proof that 
Crookshanks had eaten Scabbers, that the ginger 
hairs might have been there since Christmas, and 
that Ron had been prejudiced against her cat ever 
since Crookshanks had landed on Ron’s head in the 
Magical Menagerie. 

Personally, Harry was sure that Crookshanks had 
eaten Scabbers, and when he tried to point out to 
Hermione that the evidence all pointed that way, she 
lost her temper with Harry too. 



Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“Okay, side with Ron, I knew you would!” she said 
shrilly. “First the Firebolt, now Scabbers, everything’s 
my fault, isn’t it! Just leave me alone, Harry, I’ve got a 
lot of work to do!” 

Ron had taken the loss of his rat very hard indeed. 

“Come on, Ron, you were always saying how boring 
Scabbers was,” said Fred bracingly “And he’s been 
off-color for ages, he was wasting away. It was 
probably better for him to snuff it quickly — one 
swallow — he probably didn’t feel a thing.” 

“Fred\” said Ginny indignantly. 

“All he did was eat and sleep, Ron, you said it 
yourself,” said George. 

“He bit Goyle for us once!” Ron said miserably. 
“Remember, Harry?” 

“Yeah, that’s true,” said Harry. 

“His finest hour,” said Fred, unable to keep a straight 
face. “Let the scar on Goyle ’s finger stand as a lasting 
tribute to his memory. Oh, come on, Ron, get yourself 
down to Hogsmeade and buy a new rat, what’s the 
point of moaning?” 

In a last-ditch attempt to cheer Ron up, Harry 
persuaded him to come along to the Gryffindor team’s 
final practice before the Ravenclaw match, so that he 
could have a ride on the Firebolt after they’d finished. 
This did seem to take Ron’s mind off Scabbers for a 
moment (“Great! Can I try and shoot a few goals on 
it?”) so they set off for the Quidditch field together. 

Madam Hooch, who was still overseeing Gryffindor 
practices to keep an eye on Harry, was just as 

Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




impressed with the Firebolt as everyone else had 
been. She took it in her hands before takeoff and gave 
them the benefit of her professional opinion. 

“Look at the balance on it! If the Nimbus series has a 
fault, it’s a slight list to the tail end — you often find 
they develop a drag after a few years. They’ve updated 
the handle too, a bit slimmer than the Cleansweeps, 
reminds me of the old Silver Arrows — a pity they’ve 
stopped making them. I learned to fly on one, and a 
very fine old broom it was too. ...” 

She continued in this vein for some time, until Wood 
said, “Er — Madam Hooch? Is it okay if Harry has the 
Firebolt back? We need to practice. ...” 

“Oh — right — here you are, then, Potter,” said 
Madam Hooch. “I’ll sit over here with Weasley ...” 

She and Ron left the field to sit in the stadium, and 
the Gryffindor team gathered around Wood for his 
final instructions for tomorrow’s match. 

“Harry, I’ve just found out who Ravenclaw is playing 
as Seeker. It’s Cho Chang. She’s a fourth year, and 
she’s pretty good. ... I really hoped she wouldn’t be fit, 
she’s had some problems with injuries. ...” Wood 
scowled his displeasure that Cho Chang had made a 
full recovery, then said, “On the other hand, she rides 
a Comet Two Sixty, which is going to look like a joke 
next to the Firebolt.” He gave Harry’s broom a look of 
fervent admiration, then said, “Okay, everyone, let’s 
go 



And at long last, Harry mounted his Firebolt, and 
kicked off from the ground. 

It was better than he’d ever dreamed. The Firebolt 
turned with the lightest touch; it seemed to obey his 

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




thoughts rather than his grip; it sped across the field 
at such speed that the stadium turned into a green- 
and-gray blur; Harry turned it so sharply that Alicia 
Spinnet screamed, then he went into a perfectly 
controlled dive, brushing the grassy field with his toes 
before rising thirty, forty, fifty feet into the air again — 

“Harry, I’m letting the Snitch out!” Wood called. 

Harry turned and raced a Bludger toward the goal 
posts; he outstripped it easily, saw the Snitch dart 
out from behind Wood, and within ten seconds had 
caught it tightly in his hand. 

The team cheered madly. Harry let the Snitch go 
again, gave it a minute’s head start, then tore after it, 
weaving in and out of the others; he spotted it lurking 
near Katie Bell’s knee, looped her easily, and caught 
it again. 

It was the best practice ever; the team, inspired by 
the presence of the Firebolt in their midst, performed 
their best moves faultlessly, and by the time they hit 
the ground again, Wood didn’t have a single criticism 
to make, which, as George Weasley pointed out, was a 
first. 

“I can’t see what’s going to stop us tomorrow!” said 
Wood. “Not unless — Harry, you’ve sorted out your 
dementor problem, haven’t you?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, thinking of his feeble Patronus 
and wishing it were stronger. 

“The dementors won’t turn up again, Oliver. 
Dumbledore’d go ballistic,” said Fred confidently. 



Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, let’s hope not,” said Wood. “Anyway — good 
work, everyone. Let’s get back to the tower ... turn in 
early — ” 

“I’m staying out for a bit; Ron wants a go on the 
Firebolt,” Harry told Wood, and while the rest of the 
team headed off to the locker rooms, Harry strode 
over to Ron, who vaulted the barrier to the stands 
and came to meet him. Madam Hooch had fallen 
asleep in her seat. 

“Here you go,” said Harry, handing Ron the Firebolt. 

Ron, an expression of ecstasy on his face, mounted 
the broom and zoomed off into the gathering darkness 
while Harry walked around the edge of the field, 
watching him. Night had fallen before Madam Hooch 
awoke with a start, told Harry and Ron off for not 
waking her, and insisted that they go back to the 
castle. 

Harry shouldered the Firebolt and he and Ron walked 
out of the shadowy stadium, discussing the Firebolt’s 
superbly smooth action, its phenomenal acceleration, 
and its pinpoint turning. They were halfway toward 
the castle when Harry, glancing to his left, saw 
something that made his heart turn over — a pair of 
eyes, gleaming out of the darkness. 

Harry stopped dead, his heart banging against his 
ribs. 

“What’s the matter?” said Ron. 

Harry pointed. Ron pulled out his wand and 
muttered, “Lumos\” 



Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A beam of light fell across the grass, hit the bottom of 
a tree, and illuminated its branches; there, crouching 
among the budding leaves, was Crookshanks. 

“Get out of here!” Ron roared, and he stooped down 
and seized a stone lying on the grass, but before he 
could do anything else, Crookshanks had vanished 
with one swish of his long ginger tail. 

“See?” Ron said furiously, chucking the stone down 
again. “She’s still letting him wander about wherever 
he wants — probably washing down Scabbers with a 
couple of birds now. ...” 

Harry didn’t say anything. He took a deep breath as 
relief seeped through him; he had been sure for a 
moment that those eyes had belonged to the Grim. 
They set off for the castle once more. Slightly 
ashamed of his moment of panic, Harry didn’t say 
anything to Ron — nor did he look left or right until 
they had reached the well-lit entrance hall. 

Harry went down to breakfast the next morning with 
the rest of the boys in his dormitory, all of whom 
seemed to think the Firebolt deserved a sort of guard 
of honor. As Harry entered the Great Hall, heads 
turned in the direction of the Firebolt, and there was 
a good deal of excited muttering. Harry saw, with 
enormous satisfaction, that the Slytherin team were 
all looking thunderstruck. 

“Did you see his face?” said Ron gleefully, looking 
back at Malfoy. “He can’t believe it! This is brilliant!” 

Wood, too, was basking in the reflected glory of the 
Firebolt. 

“Put it here, Harry,” he said, laying the broom in the 
middle of the table and carefully turning it so that its 

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




name faced upward. People from the Ravenclaw and 
Hufflepuff tables were soon coming over to look. 
Cedric Diggory came over to congratulate Harry on 
having acquired such a superb replacement for his 
Nimbus, and Percy’s Ravenclaw girlfriend, Penelope 
Clearwater, asked if she could actually hold the 
Firebolt. 

“Now, now, Penny, no sabotage!” said Percy heartily 
as she examined the Firebolt closely “Penelope and I 
have got a bet on,” he told the team. “Ten Galleons on 
the outcome of the match!” 

Penelope put the Firebolt down again, thanked Harry, 
and went back to her table. 

“Harry — make sure you win,” said Percy, in an 
urgent whisper. “I haven’t got ten Galleons. Yes, I’m 
coming, Penny!” And he bustled off to join her in a 
piece of toast. 

“Sure you can manage that broom, Potter?” said a 
cold, drawling voice. 

Draco Malfoy had arrived for a closer look, Crabbe 
and Goyle right behind him. 

“Yeah, reckon so,” said Harry casually. 

“Got plenty of special features, hasn’t it?” said Malfoy, 
eyes glittering maliciously. “Shame it doesn’t come 
with a parachute — in case you get too near a 
dementor.” 

Crabbe and Goyle sniggered. 

“Pity you can’t attach an extra arm to yours, Malfoy,” 
said Harry. “Then it could catch the Snitch for you.” 



Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Gryffindor team laughed loudly. Malfoy’s pale 
eyes narrowed, and he stalked away. They watched 
him rejoin the rest of the Slytherin team, who put 
their heads together, no doubt asking Malfoy whether 
Harry’s broom really was a Firebolt. 

At a quarter to eleven, the Gryffindor team set off for 
the locker rooms. The weather couldn’t have been 
more different from their match against Hufflepuff. It 
was a clear, cool day with a very light breeze; there 
would be no visibility problems this time, and Harry, 
though nervous, was starting to feel the excitement 
only a Quidditch match could bring. They could hear 
the rest of the school moving into the stadium 
beyond. Harry took off his black school robes, 
removed his wand from his pocket, and stuck it 
inside the T-shirt he was going to wear under his 
Quidditch robes. He only hoped he wouldn’t need it. 
He wondered suddenly whether Professor Lupin was 
in the crowd, watching. 

“You know what we’ve got to do,” said Wood as they 
prepared to leave the locker rooms. “If we lose this 
match, we’re out of the running. Just — just fly like 
you did in practice yesterday, and we’ll be okay!” 

They walked out onto the field to tumultuous 
applause. The Ravenclaw team, dressed in blue, were 
already standing in the middle of the field. Their 
Seeker, Cho Chang, was the only girl on their team. 
She was shorter than Harry by about a head, and 
Harry couldn’t help noticing, nervous as he was, that 
she was extremely pretty. She smiled at Harry as the 
teams faced each other behind their captains, and he 
felt a slight lurch in the region of his stomach that he 
didn’t think had anything to do with nerves. 



Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Wood, Davies, shake hands,” Madam Hooch said 
briskly, and Wood shook hands with the Ravenclaw 
Captain. 

“Mount your brooms ... on my whistle . . . three — two 
— one — ” 

Harry kicked off into the air and the Firebolt zoomed 
higher and faster than any other broom; he soared 
around the stadium and began squinting around for 
the Snitch, listening all the while to the commentary, 
which was being provided by the Weasley twins’ 
friend Lee Jordan. 

“They’re off, and the big excitement this match is the 
Firebolt that Harry Potter is flying for Gryffindor. 
According to Which Broomstick, the Firebolt’s going to 
be the broom of choice for the national teams at this 
year’s World Championship — ” 

“Jordan, would you mind telling us what’s going on in 
the match?” interrupted Professor McGonagall’s voice. 

“Right you are, Professor — just giving a bit of 
background information — the Firebolt, incidentally, 
has a built-in auto-brake and — ” 

“Jordan!” 

“Okay, okay, Gryffindor in possession, Katie Bell of 
Gryffindor heading for goal ...” 

Harry streaked past Katie in the opposite direction, 
gazing around for a glint of gold and noticing that Cho 
Chang was tailing him closely. She was undoubtedly 
a very good flier — she kept cutting across him, 
forcing him to change direction. 



Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Show her your acceleration, Harry!” Fred yelled as he 
whooshed past in pursuit of a Bludger that was 
aiming for Alicia. 

Harry urged the Firebolt forward as they rounded the 
Ravenclaw goal posts and Cho fell behind. Just as 
Katie succeeded in scoring the first goal of the match, 
and the Gryffindor end of the field went wild, he saw 
it — the Snitch was close to the ground, flitting near 
one of the barriers. 

Harry dived; Cho saw what he was doing and tore 
after him — Harry was speeding up, excitement 
flooding him; dives were his speciality, he was ten feet 
away — 

Then a Bludger, hit by one of the Ravenclaw Beaters, 
came pelting out of nowhere; Harry veered off course, 
avoiding it by an inch, and in those few, crucial 
seconds, the Snitch had vanished. 

There was a great “Ooooooh” of disappointment from 
the Gryffindor supporters, but much applause for 
their Beater from the Ravenclaw end. George Weasley 
vented his feelings by hitting the second Bludger 
directly at the offending Beater, who was forced to roll 
right over in midair to avoid it. 

“Gryffindor leads by eighty points to zero, and look at 
that Firebolt go! Potter’s really putting it through its 
paces now, see it turn — Chang’s Comet is just no 
match for it, the Firebolt’s precision-balance is really 
noticeable in these long — ” 

“JORDAN! ARE YOU BEING PAID TO ADVERTISE 
FIREBOLTS? GET ON WITH THE COMMENTARY!” 

Ravenclaw was pulling back; they had now scored 
three goals, which put Gryffindor only fifty points 

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




ahead — if Cho got the Snitch before him, Ravenclaw 
would win. Harry dropped lower, narrowly avoiding a 
Ravenclaw Chaser, scanning the field frantically — a 
glint of gold, a flutter of tiny wings — the Snitch was 
circling the Gryffindor goal post — 

Harry accelerated, eyes fixed on the speck of gold 
ahead — but just then, Cho appeared out of thin air, 
blocking him — 

“HARRY, THIS IS NO TIME TO BE A GENTLEMAN!” 
Wood roared as Harry swerved to avoid a collision. 
“KNOCK HER OFF HER BROOM IF YOU HAVE TO!” 

Harry turned and caught sight of Cho; she was 
grinning. The Snitch had vanished again. Harry 
turned his Firebolt upward and was soon twenty feet 
above the game. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw 
Cho following him. ... She’d decided to mark him 
rather than search for the Snitch herself. . . . All right, 
then ... if she wanted to tail him, she’d have to take 
the consequences. ... 

He dived again, and Cho, thinking he’d seen the 
Snitch, tried to follow; Harry pulled out of the dive 
very sharply; she hurtled downward; he rose fast as a 
bullet once more, and then saw it, for the third time 
— the Snitch was glittering way above the field at the 
Ravenclaw end. 

He accelerated; so, many feet below, did Cho. He was 
winning, gaining on the Snitch with every second — 
then — 

“Oh!” screamed Cho, pointing. 

Distracted, Harry looked down. 



Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Three dementors, three tall, black, hooded dementors, 
were looking up at him. 

He didn’t stop to think. Plunging a hand down the 
neck of his robes, he whipped out his wand and 
roared, “Expecto patronum).” 

Something silver-white, something enormous, erupted 
from the end of his wand. He knew it had shot 
directly at the dementors but didn’t pause to watch; 
his mind still miraculously clear, he looked ahead — 
he was nearly there. He stretched out the hand still 
grasping his wand and just managed to close his 
fingers over the small, struggling Snitch. 

Madam Hooch’s whistle sounded. Harry turned 
around in midair and saw six scarlet blurs bearing 
down on him; next moment, the whole team was 
hugging him so hard he was nearly pulled off his 
broom. Down below he could hear the roars of the 
Gryffindors in the crowd. 

“That’s my boy!” Wood kept yelling. Alicia, Angelina, 
and Katie had all kissed Harry; Fred had him in a grip 
so tight Harry felt as though his head would come off. 
In complete disarray, the team managed to make its 
way back to the ground. Harry got off his broom and 
looked up to see a gaggle of Gryffindor supporters 
sprinting onto the field, Ron in the lead. Before he 
knew it, he had been engulfed by the cheering crowd. 

“Yes!” Ron yelled, yanking Harry’s arm into the air. 
“Yes! Yes!” 

“Well done, Harry!” said Percy, looking delighted. “Ten 
Galleons to me! Must find Penelope, excuse me — ” 

“Good for you, Harry!” roared Seamus Finnigan. 



Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ruddy brilliant!” boomed Hagrid over the heads of 
the milling Gryffindors. 

“That was quite some Patronus,” said a voice in 
Harry’s ear. 

Harry turned around to see Professor Lupin, who 
looked both shaken and pleased. 

“The dementors didn’t affect me at all!” Harry said 
excitedly. “I didn’t feel a thing!” 

“That would be because they — er — weren’t 
dementors,” said Professor Lupin. “Come and see — ” 

He led Harry out of the crowd until they were able to 
see the edge of the field. 

“You gave Mr. Malfoy quite a fright,” said Lupin. 

Harry stared. Lying in a crumpled heap on the ground 
were Malfoy, Crabbe, Goyle, and Marcus Flint, the 
Slytherin team Captain, all struggling to remove 
themselves from long, black, hooded robes. It looked 
as though Malfoy had been standing on Goyle ’s 
shoulders. Standing over them, with an expression of 
the utmost fury on her face, was Professor 
McGonagall. 

“An unworthy trick!” she was shouting. “A low and 
cowardly attempt to sabotage the Gryffindor Seeker! 
Detention for all of you, and fifty points from 
Slytherin! I shall be speaking to Professor 
Dumbledore about this, make no mistake! Ah, here 
he comes now!” 

If anything could have set the seal on Gryffindor’s 
victory, it was this. Ron, who had fought his way 
through to Harry’s side, doubled up with laughter as 

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




they watched Malfoy fighting to extricate himself from 
the robe, Goyle’s head still stuck inside it. 



“Come on, Harry!” said George, fighting his way over. 
“Party! Gryffindor common room, now!” 

“Right,” said Harry, and feeling happier than he had 
in ages, he and the rest of the team led the way, still 
in their scarlet robes, out of the stadium and back up 
to the castle. 



It felt as though they had already won the Quidditch 
Cup; the party went on all day and well into the night. 
Fred and George Weasley disappeared for a couple of 
hours and returned with armfuls of bottles of 
butterbeer, pumpkin fizz, and several bags full of 
Honeydukes sweets. 

“How did you do that?” squealed Angelina Johnson as 
George started throwing Peppermint Toads into the 
crowd. 

“With a little help from Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and 
Prongs,” Fred muttered in Harry’s ear. 

Only one person wasn’t joining in the festivities. 
Hermione, incredibly, was sitting in a corner, 
attempting to read an enormous book entitled Home 
Life and Social Habits of British Muggles. Harry broke 
away from the table where Fred and George had 
started juggling butterbeer bottles and went over to 
her. 

“Did you even come to the match?” he asked her. 

“Of course I did,” said Hermione in a strangely high- 
pitched voice, not looking up. “And I’m very glad we 

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




won, and I think you did really well, but I need to 
read this by Monday.” 

“Come on, Hermione, come and have some food,” 
Harry said, looking over at Ron and wondering 
whether he was in a good enough mood to bury the 
hatchet. 

“I can’t, Harry. I’ve still got four hundred and twenty- 
two pages to read!” said Hermione, now sounding 
slightly hysterical. “Anyway ...” She glanced over at 
Ron too. “He doesn’t want me to join in.” 

There was no arguing with this, as Ron chose that 
moment to say loudly, “If Scabbers hadn’t just been 
eaten, he could have had some of those Fudge Flies. 
He used to really like them — ” 

Hermione burst into tears. Before Harry could say or 
do anything, she tucked the enormous book under 
her arm, and, still sobbing, ran toward the staircase 
to the girls’ dormitories and out of sight. 

“Can’t you give her a break?” Harry asked Ron 
quietly. 

“No,” said Ron flatly. “If she just acted like she was 
sorry — but she’ll never admit she’s wrong, Hermione. 
She’s still acting like Scabbers has gone on vacation 
or something.” 

The Gryffindor party ended only when Professor 
McGonagall turned up in her tartan dressing gown 
and hair net at one in the morning, to insist that they 
all go to bed. Harry and Ron climbed the stairs to 
their dormitory, still discussing the match. At last, 
exhausted, Harry climbed into bed, twitched the 
hangings of his four-poster shut to block out a ray of 



Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




moonlight, lay back, and felt himself almost instantly 
drifting off to sleep. ... 

He had a very strange dream. He was walking 
through a forest, his Firebolt over his shoulder, 
following something silvery- white. It was winding its 
way through the trees ahead, and he could only catch 
glimpses of it between the leaves. Anxious to catch up 
with it, he sped up, but as he moved faster, so did his 
quarry. Harry broke into a run, and ahead he heard 
hooves gathering speed. Now he was running flat out, 
and ahead he could hear galloping. Then he turned a 
corner into a clearing and — 

“AAAAAAAAAAAAAARRRRRRRRRRRRGGGGGHHHHH 
! NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!” 

Harry woke as suddenly as though he’d been hit in 
the face. Disoriented in the total darkness, he 
fumbled with his hangings — he could hear 
movements around him, and Seamus Finnigan’s voice 
from the other side of the room: “What’s going on?” 

Harry thought he heard the dormitory door slam. At 
last finding the divide in his curtains, he ripped them 
back, and at the same moment, Dean Thomas lit his 
lamp. 

Ron was sitting up in bed, the hangings torn from one 
side, a look of utmost terror on his face. 

“Black! Sirius Black! With a knife!” 

“What?” 

“Here! Just now! Slashed the curtains! Woke me up!” 
“You sure you weren’t dreaming, Ron?” said Dean. 



Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Look at the curtains! I tell you, he was here!” 

They all scrambled out of bed; Harry reached the 
dormitory door first, and they sprinted back down the 
staircase. Doors opened behind them, and sleepy 
voices called after them. 

“Who shouted?” 

“What ’re you doing?” 

The common room was lit with the glow of the dying 
fire, still littered with the debris from the party. It was 
deserted. 

“Are you sure you weren’t dreaming, Ron?” 

“I’m telling you, I saw him!” 

“What’s all the noise?” 

“Professor McGonagall told us to go to bed!” 

A few of the girls had come down their staircase, 
pulling on dressing gowns and yawning. Boys, too, 
were reappearing. 

“Excellent, are we carrying on?” said Fred Weasley 
brightly. 

“Everyone back upstairs!” said Percy, 
hurrying into the common room and pinning his 
Head Boy badge to his pajamas as he spoke. 

“Perce — Sirius Black!” said Ron faintly. “In our 
dormitory! With a knife! Woke me up!” 

The common room went very still. 



Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Nonsense!” said Percy, looking startled. “You had too 
much to eat, Ron — had a nightmare — ” 



“I’m telling you — ” 

“Now, really, enough’s enough!” 

Professor McGonagall was back. She slammed the 
portrait behind her as she entered the common room 
and stared furiously around. 

“I am delighted that Gryffindor won the match, but 
this is getting ridiculous! Percy, I expected better of 
you!” 

“I certainly didn’t authorize this, Professor!” said 
Percy, puffing himself up indignantly. “I was just 
telling them all to get back to bed! My brother Ron 
here had a nightmare — ” 

“IT WASNT A NIGHTMARE!” Ron yelled. 

“PROFESSOR, I WOKE UP, AND SIRIUS BLACK WAS 
STANDING OVER ME, HOLDING A KNIFE!” 

Professor McGonagall stared at him. 

“Don’t be ridiculous, Weasley, how could he possibly 
have gotten through the portrait hole?” 

“Ask him!” said Ron, pointing a shaking finger at the 
back of Sir Cadogan’s picture. “Ask him if he saw — ” 

Glaring suspiciously at Ron, Professor McGonagall 
pushed the portrait back open and went outside. The 
whole common room listened with bated breath. 

“Sir Cadogan, did you just let a man enter Gryffindor 
Tower?” 

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Certainly, good lady!” cried Sir Cadogan. 

There was a stunned silence, both inside and outside 
the common room. 

“You — you did?” said Professor McGonagall. “But — 
but the password!” 

“He had ’em!” said Sir Cadogan proudly. “Had the 
whole week’s, my lady! Read ’em off a little piece of 
paper!” 

Professor McGonagall pulled herself back through the 
portrait hole to face the stunned crowd. She was 
white as chalk. 

“Which person,” she said, her voice shaking, “which 
abysmally foolish person wrote down this week’s 
passwords and left them lying around?” 

There was utter silence, broken by the smallest of 
terrified squeaks. Neville Longbottom, trembling from 
head to fluffy-slippered toes, raised his hand slowly 
into the air. 



Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






SNAPE’S GRUDGE 

No one in Gryffindor Tower slept that night. They 
knew that the castle was being searched again, and 
the whole House stayed awake in the common room, 
waiting to hear whether Black had been caught. 
Professor McGonagall came back at dawn, to tell 
them that he had again escaped. 

Throughout the day, everywhere they went they saw 
signs of tighter security; Professor Flitwick could be 
seen teaching the front doors to recognize a large 
picture of Sirius Black; Filch was suddenly bustling 
up and down the corridors, boarding up everything 
from tiny cracks in the walls to mouse holes. Sir 
Cadogan had been fired. His portrait had been taken 
back to its lonely landing on the seventh floor, and 
the Fat Lady was back. She had been expertly 
restored, but was still extremely nervous, and had 
agreed to return to her job only on condition that she 
was given extra protection. A bunch of surly security 
trolls had been hired to guard her. They paced the 
corridor in a menacing group, talking in grunts and 
comparing the size of their clubs. 

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Harry couldn’t help noticing that the statue of the 
one-eyed witch on the third floor remained unguarded 
and unblocked. It seemed that Fred and George had 
been right in thinking that they — and now Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione — were the only ones who knew 
about the hidden passageway within it. 

“D’you reckon we should tell someone?” Harry asked 
Ron. 

“We know he’s not coming in through Honey duke’s,” 
said Ron dismissively “We’d’ve heard if the shop had 
been broken into.” 

Harry was glad Ron took this view. If the one-eyed 
witch was boarded up too, he would never be able to 
go into Hogsmeade again. 

Ron had become an instant celebrity. For the first 
time in his life, people were paying more attention to 
him than to Harry, and it was clear that Ron was 
rather enjoying the experience. Though still severely 
shaken by the night’s events, he was happy to tell 
anyone who asked what had happened, with a wealth 
of detail. 

"... I was asleep, and I heard this ripping noise, and I 
thought it was in my dream, you know? But then 
there was this draft ... I woke up and one side of the 
hangings on my bed had been pulled down. ... I rolled 
over . . . and I saw him standing over me . . . like a 
skeleton, with loads of filthy hair . . . holding this great 
long knife, must’ve been twelve inches ... and he 
looked at me, and I looked at him, and then I yelled, 
and he scampered. 

“Why, though?” Ron added to Harry as the group of 
second-year girls who had been listening to his 
chilling tale departed. “Why did he run?” 

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had been wondering the same thing. Why had 
Black, having got the wrong bed, not silenced Ron 
and proceeded to Harry? Black had proved twelve 
years ago that he didn’t mind murdering innocent 
people, and this time he had been facing five 
unarmed boys, four of whom were asleep. 

“He must’ve known he’d have a job getting back out of 
the castle once you’d yelled and woken people up,” 
said Harry thoughtfully. “He’d’ve had to kill the whole 
House to get back through the portrait hole . . . then 
he would’ve met the teachers. ...” 

Neville was in total disgrace. Professor McGonagall 
was so furious with him she had banned him from all 
future Hogsmeade visits, given him a detention, and 
forbidden anyone to give him the password into the 
tower. Poor Neville was forced to wait outside the 
common room every night for somebody to let him in, 
while the security trolls leered unpleasantly at him. 
None of these punishments, however, came close to 
matching the one his grandmother had in store for 
him. Two days after Black’s break-in, she sent Neville 
the very worst thing a Hogwarts student could receive 
over breakfast — a Howler. 

The school owls swooped into the Great Hall carrying 
the mail as usual, and Neville choked as a huge barn 
owl landed in front of him, a scarlet envelope clutched 
in its beak. Harry and Ron, who were sitting opposite 
him, recognized the letter as a Howler at once — Ron 
had got one from his mother the year before. 

“Run for it, Neville,” Ron advised. 

Neville didn’t need telling twice. He seized the 
envelope, and holding it before him like a bomb, 
sprinted out of the hall, while the Slytherin table 
exploded with laughter at the sight of him. They 

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




heard the Howler go off in the entrance hall — 
Neville’s grandmother’s voice, magically magnified to 
a hundred times its usual volume, shrieking about 
how he had brought shame on the whole family. 

Harry was too busy feeling sorry for Neville to notice 
immediately that he had a letter too. Hedwig got his 
attention by nipping him sharply on the wrist. 

“Ouch! Oh — thanks, Hedwig.” 

Harry tore open the envelope while Hedwig helped 
herself to some of Neville’s cornflakes. The note inside 
said: 

Dear Harry and Ron, 

How about having tea with me this afternoon ’round 
six? 



I’ll come and collect you from the castle. 

WAIT FOR ME IN THE ENTRANCE HALL; 

YOU’RE NOT ALLOWED OUT ON YOUR OWN 
Cheers, 

Hagrid 

“He probably wants to hear all about Black!” said 
Ron. 

So at six o’clock that afternoon, Harry and Ron left 
Gryffindor Tower, passed the security trolls at a run, 
and headed down to the entrance hall. 

Hagrid was already waiting for them. 



Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“All right, Hagrid!” said Ron. “S’pose you want to hear 
about Saturday night, do you?” 

“I’ve already heard all abou’ it,” said Hagrid, opening 
the front doors and leading them outside. 

“Oh,” said Ron, looking slightly put out. 

The first thing they saw on entering Hagrid’s cabin 
was Buckbeak, who was stretched out on top of 
Hagrid’s patchwork quilt, his enormous wings folded 
tight to his body, enjoying a large plate of dead 
ferrets. Averting his eyes from this unpleasant sight, 
Harry saw a gigantic, hairy brown suit and a very 
horrible yellow-and-orange tie hanging from the top of 
Hagrid’s wardrobe door. 

“What are they for, Hagrid?” said Harry. 

“Buckbeak’s case against the Committee fer the 
Disposal o’ Dangerous Creatures,” said Hagrid. “This 
Friday. Him an’ me’ll be goin’ down ter London 
together. I’ve booked two beds on the Knight Bus. ...” 

Harry felt a nasty pang of guilt. He had completely 
forgotten that Buckbeak’s trial was so near, and 
judging by the uneasy look on Ron’s face, he had too. 
They had also forgotten their promise about helping 
him prepare Buckbeak’s defense; the arrival of the 
Firebolt had driven it clean out of their minds. 

Hagrid poured them tea and offered them a plate of 
Bath buns, but they knew better than to accept; they 
had had too much experience with Hagrid’s cooking. 

“I got somethin’ ter discuss with you two,” said 
Hagrid, sitting himself between them and looking 
uncharacteristically serious. 



Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” said Harry. 

“Hermione,” said Hagrid. 

“What about her?” said Ron. 

“She’s in a righ’ state, that’s what. She’s bin cornin’ 
down ter visit me a lot since Chris ’mas. Bin feelin’ 
lonely. Firs’ yeh weren’ talking to her because o’ the 
Firebolt, now yer not talkin’ to her because her cat — ” 

“ — ate Scabbers!” Ron interjected angrily. 

“Because her cat acted like all cats do,” Hagrid 
continued doggedly. “She’s cried a fair few times, yeh 
know. Goin’ through a rough time at the moment. 
Bitten off more’n she can chew, if yeh ask me, all the 
work she’s tryin’ ter do. Still found time ter help me 
with Buckbeak’s case, mind. ... She’s found some 
really good stuff fer me ... reckon he’ll stand a good 
chance now. ...” 

“Hagrid, we should’ve helped as well — sorry — ” 

Harry began awkwardly. 

“I’m not blamin’ yeh!” said Hagrid, waving Harry’s 
apology aside. “Gawd knows yeh’ve had enough ter be 
gettin’ on with. I’ve seen yeh practicin’ Quidditch ev’ry 
hour o’ the day an’ night — but I gotta tell yeh, I 
thought you two’d value yer friend more’n 
broomsticks or rats. Tha’s all.” 

Harry and Ron exchanged uncomfortable looks. 

“Really upset, she was, when Black nearly stabbed 
yeh, Ron. She’s got her heart in the right place, 
Hermione has, an’ you two not talkin’ to her — ” 



Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“If she’d just get rid of that cat, I’d speak to her 
again!” Ron said angrily. “But she’s still sticking up 
for it! It’s a maniac, and she won’t hear a word 
against it!” 

“Ah, well, people can be a bit stupid abou’ their pets,” 
said Hagrid wisely. Behind him, Buckbeak spat a few 
ferret bones onto Hagrid’s pillow. 

They spent the rest of their visit discussing 
Gryffindor’s improved chances for the Quidditch Cup. 
At nine o’clock, Hagrid walked them back up to the 
castle. 

A large group of people was bunched around the 
bulletin board when they returned to the common 
room. 

“Hogsmeade, next weekend!” said Ron, craning over 
the heads to read the new notice. “What d’you 
reckon?” he added quietly to Harry as they went to sit 
down. 

“Well, Filch hasn’t done anything about the passage 
into Honeydukes. ...” Harry said, even more quietly. 

“Harry!” said a voice in his right ear. Harry started 
and looked around at Hermione, who was sitting at 
the table right behind them and clearing a space in 
the wall of books that had been hiding her. 

“Harry, if you go into Hogsmeade again ... I’ll tell 
Professor McGonagall about that map!” said 
Hermione. 

“Can you hear someone talking, Harry?” growled Ron, 
not looking at Hermione. 



Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron, how can you let him go with you? After what 
Sirius Black nearly did to youl I mean it, I’ll tell — ” 

“So now you’re trying to get Harry expelled!” said Ron 
furiously. “Haven’t you done enough damage this 
year?” 

Hermione opened her mouth to respond, but with a 
soft hiss, Crookshanks leapt onto her lap. Hermione 
took one frightened look at the expression on Ron’s 
face, gathered up Crookshanks, and hurried away 
toward the girls’ dormitories. 

“So how about it?” Ron said to Harry as though there 
had been no interruption. “Come on, last time we 
went you didn’t see anything. You haven’t even been 
inside Zonko’s yet!” 

Harry looked around to check that Hermione was well 
out of earshot. 

“Okay,” he said. “But I’m taking the Invisibility Cloak 
this time.” 

On Saturday morning, Harry packed his Invisibility 
Cloak in his bag, slipped the Marauder’s Map into his 
pocket, and went down to breakfast with everyone 
else. Hermione kept shooting suspicious looks down 
the table at him, but he avoided her eye and was 
careful to let her see him walking back up the marble 
staircase in the entrance hall as everybody else 
proceeded to the front doors. 

“ ’Bye!” Harry called to Ron. “See you when you get 
back!” 

Ron grinned and winked. 



Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry hurried up to the third floor, slipping the 
Marauder’s Map out of his pocket as he went. 
Crouching behind the one-eyed witch, he smoothed it 
out. A tiny dot was moving in his direction. Harry 
squinted at it. The minuscule writing next to it read 
Neville Longbottom. 

Harry quickly pulled out his wand, muttered, 

“ Dissendium).” and shoved his bag into the statue, but 
before he could climb in himself, Neville came around 
the corner. 

“Harry! I forgot you weren’t going to Hogsmeade 
either!” 

“Hi, Neville,” said Harry, moving swiftly away from the 
statue and pushing the map back into his pocket. 
“What are you up to?” 

“Nothing,” shrugged Neville. “Want a game of 
Exploding Snap?” 

“Er — not now — I was going to go to the library and 
do that vampire essay for Lupin — ” 

“I’ll come with you!” said Neville brightly. “I haven’t 
done it either!” 

“Er — hang on — yeah, I forgot, I finished it last 
night!” 

“Great, you can help me!” said Neville, his round face 
anxious. “I don’t understand that thing about the 
garlic at all — do they have to eat it, or — ” 

He broke off with a small gasp, looking over Harry’s 
shoulder. 

It was Snape. Neville took a quick step behind Harry. 

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And what are you two doing here?” said Snape, 
coming to a halt and looking from one to the other. 
“An odd place to meet — ” 

To Harry’s immense disquiet, Snape’s black eyes 
flicked to the doorways on either side of them, and 
then to the one-eyed witch. 

“We’re not — meeting here,” said Harry. “We just — 
met here.” 

“Indeed?” said Snape. “You have a habit of turning up 
in unexpected places, Potter, and you are very rarely 
there for no good reason. ... I suggest the pair of you 
return to Gryffindor Tower, where you belong.” 

Harry and Neville set off without another word. As 
they turned the corner, Harry looked back. Snape was 
running one of his hands over the one-eyed witch’s 
head, examining it closely. 

Harry managed to shake Neville off at the Fat Lady by 
telling him the password, then pretending he’d left his 
vampire essay in the library and doubling back. Once 
out of sight of the security trolls, he pulled out the 
map again and held it close to his nose. 

The third floor corridor seemed to be deserted. Harry 
scanned the map carefully and saw, with a leap of 
relief, that the tiny dot labeled Severus Snape was 
now back in its office. 

He sprinted back to the one-eyed witch, opened her 
hump, heaved himself inside, and slid down to meet 
his bag at the bottom of the stone chute. He wiped 
the Marauder’s Map blank again, then set off at a 
run. 



Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, completely hidden beneath the Invisibility 
Cloak, emerged into the sunlight outside Honeydukes 
and prodded Ron in the back. 

“It’s me,” he muttered. 

“What kept you?” Ron hissed. 

“Snape was hanging around. ...” 

They set off up the High Street. 

“Where are you?” Ron kept muttering out of the 
corner of his mouth. “Are you still there? This feels 
weird. ...” 

They went to the post office; Ron pretended to be 
checking the price of an owl to Bill in Egypt so that 
Harry could have a good look around. The owls sat 
hooting softly down at him, at least three hundred of 
them; from Great Grays right down to tiny little Scops 
owls (“Local Deliveries Only”), which were so small 
they could have sat in the palm of Harry’s hand. 

Then they visited Zonko’s, which was so packed with 
students Harry had to exercise great care not to tread 
on anyone and cause a panic. There were jokes and 
tricks to fulfill even Fred’s and George’s wildest 
dreams; Harry gave Ron whispered orders and passed 
him some gold from under the cloak. They left 
Zonko’s with their money bags considerably lighter 
than they had been on entering, but their pockets 
bulging with Dungbombs, Hiccup Sweets, Frog Spawn 
Soap, and a Nose-Biting Teacup apiece. 

The day was fine and breezy, and neither of them felt 
like staying indoors, so they walked past the Three 
Broomsticks and climbed a slope to visit the 
Shrieking Shack, the most haunted dwelling in 

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Britain. It stood a little way above the rest of the 
village, and even in daylight was slightly creepy, with 
its boarded windows and dank overgrown garden. 

“Even the Hogwarts ghosts avoid it,” said Ron as they 
leaned on the fence, looking up at it. “I asked Nearly 
Headless Nick ... he says he’s heard a very rough 
crowd lives here. No one can get in. Fred and George 
tried, obviously, but all the entrances are sealed shut. 



Harry, feeling hot from their climb, was just 
considering taking off the cloak for a few minutes 
when they heard voices nearby. Someone was 
climbing toward the house from the other side of the 
hill; moments later, Malfoy had appeared, followed 
closely by Crabbe and Goyle. Malfoy was speaking. 

"... should have an owl from Father any time now. He 
had to go to the hearing to tell them about my arm . . . 
about how I couldn’t use it for three months. ...” 

Crabbe and Goyle sniggered. 

“I really wish I could hear that great hairy moron 
trying to defend himself ... There’s no ’arm in ’im, 
’onest — ’ . . . that hippogriff’s as good as dead — ” 

Malfoy suddenly caught sight of Ron. His pale face 
split in a malevolent grin. 

“What are you doing, Weasley?” 

Malfoy looked up at the crumbling house behind Ron. 

“Suppose you’d love to live here, wouldn’t you, 
Weasley? Dreaming about having your own bedroom? 

I heard your family all sleep in one room — is that 
true?” 

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry seized the back of Ron’s robes to stop him from 
leaping on Malfoy. 

“Leave him to me,” he hissed in Ron’s ear. 

The opportunity was too perfect to miss. Harry crept 
silently around behind Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, 
bent down, and scooped a large handful of mud out of 
the path. 

“We were just discussing your friend Hagrid,” Malfoy 
said to Ron. “Just trying to imagine what he’s saying 
to the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous 
Creatures. D’you think he’ll cry when they cut off his 
hippogriff’s — ” 

SPLAT. 

Malfoy’s head jerked forward as the mud hit him; his 
silver-blond hair was suddenly dripping in muck. 

“What the — ?” 

Ron had to hold onto the fence to keep himself 
standing, he was laughing so hard. Malfoy, Crabbe, 
and Goyle spun stupidly on the spot, staring wildly 
around, Malfoy trying to wipe his hair clean. 

“What was that? Who did that?” 

“Very haunted up here, isn’t it?” said Ron, with the 
air of one commenting on the weather. 

Crabbe and Goyle were looking scared. Their bulging 
muscles were no use against ghosts. Malfoy was 
staring madly around at the deserted landscape. 



Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry sneaked along the path, where a particularly 
sloppy puddle yielded some foul-smelling, green 
sludge. 

SPLATTER. 

Crabbe and Goyle caught some this time. Goyle 
hopped furiously on the spot, trying to rub it out of 
his small, dull eyes. 

“It came from over there!” said Malfoy, wiping his 
face, and staring at a spot some six feet to the left of 
Harry. 

Crabbe blundered forward, his long arms 
outstretched like a zombie. Harry dodged around him, 
picked up a stick, and lobbed it at Crabbe ’s back. 
Harry doubled up with silent laughter as Crabbe did a 
kind of pirouette in midair, trying to see who had 
thrown it. As Ron was the only person Crabbe could 
see, it was Ron he started toward, but Harry stuck 
out his leg. Crabbe stumbled — and his huge, flat foot 
caught the hem of Harry’s cloak. Harry felt a great 
tug, then the cloak slid off his face. 

For a split second, Malfoy stared at him. 

“AAARGH!” he yelled, pointing at Harry’s head. Then 
he turned tail and ran, at breakneck speed, back 
down the hill, Crabbe and Goyle behind him. 

Harry tugged the cloak up again, but the damage was 
done. 

“Harry!” Ron said, stumbling forward and staring 
hopelessly at the point where Harry had disappeared, 
“you’d better run for it! If Malfoy tells anyone — you’d 
better get back to the castle, quick — ” 



Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“See you later,” said Harry, and without another 
word, he tore back down the path toward Hogsmeade. 



Would Malfoy believe what he had seen? Would 
anyone believe Malfoy? Nobody knew about the 
Invisibility Cloak — nobody except Dumbledore. 
Harry’s stomach turned over — Dumbledore would 
know exactly what had happened, if Malfoy said 
anything — 

Back into Honeydukes, back down the cellar steps, 
across the stone floor, through the trapdoor — Harry 
pulled off the cloak, tucked it under his arm, and ran, 
flat out, along the passage. ... Malfoy would get back 
first . . . how long would it take him to find a teacher? 
Panting, a sharp pain in his side, Harry didn’t slow 
down until he reached the stone slide. He would have 
to leave the cloak where it was, it was too much of a 
giveaway in case Malfoy had tipped off a teacher — he 
hid it in a shadowy corner, then started to climb, fast 
as he could, his sweaty hands slipping on the sides of 
the chute. He reached the inside of the witch’s hump, 
tapped it with his wand, stuck his head through, and 
hoisted himself out; the hump closed, and just as 
Harry jumped out from behind the statue, he heard 
quick footsteps approaching. 

It was Snape. He approached Harry at a swift walk, 
his black robes swishing, then stopped in front of 
him. 

“So,” he said. 

There was a look of suppressed triumph about him. 
Harry tried to look innocent, all too aware of his 
sweaty face and his muddy hands, which he quickly 
hid in his pockets. 

“Come with me, Potter,” said Snape. 

Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry followed him downstairs, trying to wipe his 
hands clean on the inside of his robes without Snape 
noticing. They walked down the stairs to the 
dungeons and then into Snape’s office. 

Harry had been in here only once before, and he had 
been in very serious trouble then too. Snape had 
acquired a few more slimy horrible things in jars 
since last time, all standing on shelves behind his 
desk, glinting in the firelight and adding to the 
threatening atmosphere. 

“Sit,” said Snape. 

Harry sat. Snape, however, remained standing. 

“Mr. Malfoy has just been to see me with a strange 
story, Potter,” said Snape. 

Harry didn’t say anything. 

“He tells me that he was up by the Shrieking Shack 
when he ran into Weasley — apparently alone.” 

Still, Harry didn’t speak. 

“Mr. Malfoy states that he was standing talking to 
Weasley, when a large amount of mud hit him in the 
back of the head. How do you think that could have 
happened?” 

Harry tried to look mildly surprised. 

“I don’t know, Professor.” 

Snape’s eyes were boring into Harry’s. It was exactly 
like trying to stare down a hippogriff. Harry tried hard 
not to blink. 



Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Mr. Malfoy then saw an extraordinary apparition. 

Can you imagine what it might have been, Potter?” 

“No,” said Harry, now trying to sound innocently 
curious. 

“It was your head, Potter. Floating in midair.” 

There was a long silence. 

“Maybe he’d better go to Madam Pomfrey,” said Harry. 
“If he’s seeing things like — ” 

“What would your head have been doing in 
Hogsmeade, Potter?” said Snape softly. “Your head is 
not allowed in Hogsmeade. No part of your body has 
permission to be in Hogsmeade.” 

“I know that,” said Harry, striving to keep his face free 
of guilt or fear. “It sounds like Malfoy’s having 
hallucin — ” 

“Malfoy is not having hallucinations,” snarled Snape, 
and he bent down, a hand on each arm of Harry’s 
chair, so that their faces were a foot apart. “If your 
head was in Hogsmeade, so was the rest of you.” 

“I’ve been up in Gryffindor Tower,” said Harry. “Like 
you told — ” 

“Can anyone confirm that?” 

Harry didn’t say anything. Snape’s thin mouth curled 
into a horrible smile. 

“So,” he said, straightening up again. “Everyone from 
the Minister of Magic downward has been trying to 
keep famous Harry Potter safe from Sirius Black. But 
famous Harry Potter is a law unto himself. Let the 

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




ordinary people worry about his safety! Famous Harry 
Potter goes where he wants to, with no thought for 
the consequences.” 

Harry stayed silent. Snape was trying to provoke him 
into telling the truth. He wasn’t going to do it. Snape 
had no proof — yet. 

“How extraordinarily like your father you are, Potter,” 
Snape said suddenly, his eyes glinting. “He too was 
exceedingly arrogant. A small amount of talent on the 
Quidditch field made him think he was a cut above 
the rest of us too. Strutting around the place with his 
friends and admirers . . . The resemblance between you 
is uncanny.” 

“My dad didn’t strut,” said Harry, before he could stop 
himself. “And neither do I.” 

“Your father didn’t set much store by rules either,” 
Snape went on, pressing his advantage, his thin face 
full of malice. “Rules were for lesser mortals, not 
Quidditch Cup-winners. His head was so swollen — ” 

“SHUT UP!” 

Harry was suddenly on his feet. Rage such as he had 
not felt since his last night in Privet Drive was 
coursing through him. He didn’t care that Snape’s 
face had gone rigid, the black eyes flashing 
dangerously. 

“ What did you say to me, Potter?” 

“I told you to shut up about my dad!” Harry yelled. “I 
know the truth, all right? He saved your life! 
Dumbledore told me! You wouldn’t even be here if it 
wasn’t for my dad!” 



Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Snape’s sallow skin had gone the color of sour milk. 

“And did the headmaster tell you the circumstances 
in which your father saved my life?” he whispered. 

“Or did he consider the details too unpleasant for 
precious Potter’s delicate ears?” 

Harry bit his lip. He didn’t know what had happened 
and didn’t want to admit it — but Snape seemed to 
have guessed the truth. 

“I would hate for you to run away with a false idea of 
your father, Potter,” he said, a terrible grin twisting 
his face. “Have you been imagining some act of 
glorious heroism? Then let me correct you — your 
saintly father and his friends played a highly amusing 
joke on me that would have resulted in my death if 
your father hadn’t got cold feet at the last moment. 
There was nothing brave about what he did. He was 
saving his own skin as much as mine. Had their joke 
succeeded, he would have been expelled from 
Hogwarts.” 

Snape’s uneven, yellowish teeth were bared. 

“Turn out your pockets, Potter!” he spat suddenly. 

Harry didn’t move. There was a pounding in his ears. 

“Turn out your pockets, or we go straight to the 
headmaster! Pull them out, Potter!” 

Cold with dread, Harry slowly pulled out the bag of 
Zonko’s tricks and the Marauder’s Map. 

Snape picked up the Zonko’s bag. 



Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron gave them to me,” said Harry, praying he’d get a 
chance to tip Ron off before Snape saw him. “He — 
brought them back from Hogsmeade last time — ” 

“Indeed? And you’ve been carrying them around ever 
since? How very touching . . . and what is this?” 

Snape had picked up the map. Harry tried with all his 
might to keep his face impassive. 

“Spare bit of parchment,” he said with a shrug. 

Snape turned it over, his eyes on Harry. 

“Surely you don’t need such a very old piece of 
parchment?” he said. “Why don’t I just — throw this 
away?” 

His hand moved toward the fire. 

“No!” Harry said quickly. 

“So!” said Snape, his long nostrils quivering. “Is this 
another treasured gift from Mr. Weasley? Or is it — 
something else? A letter, perhaps, written in invisible 
ink? Or — instructions to get into Hogsmeade without 
passing the dementors?” 

Harry blinked. Snape ’s eyes gleamed. 

“Let me see, let me see ... ,” he muttered, taking out 
his wand and smoothing the map out on his desk. 
“Reveal your secret!” he said, touching the wand to 
the parchment. 

Nothing happened. Harry clenched his hands to stop 
them from shaking. 



Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Show yourself!” Snape said, tapping the map 
sharply. 

It stayed blank. Harry was taking deep, calming 
breaths. 

“Professor Severus Snape, master of this school, 
commands you to yield the information you conceal!” 
Snape said, hitting the map with his wand. 

As though an invisible hand were writing upon it, 
words appeared on the smooth surface of the map. 

“Mr. Moony presents his compliments to Professor 
Snape, and begs him to keep his abnormally large 
nose out of other people’s business.” 

Snape froze. Harry stared, dumbstruck, at the 
message. But the map didn’t stop there. More writing 
was appearing beneath the first. 

“Mr. Prongs agrees with Mr. Moony, and would like to 
add that Professor Snape is an ugly git.” 

It would have been very funny if the situation hadn’t 
been so serious. And there was more. ... 

“Mr. Padfoot would like to register his astonishment 
that an idiot like that ever became a professor.” 

Harry closed his eyes in horror. When he’d opened 
them, the map had had its last word. 

“Mr. Wormtail bids Professor Snape good day, and 
advises him to wash his hair, the slimeball.” 

Harry waited for the blow to fall. 

“So ... ,” said Snape softly. “We’ll see about this. ...” 

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He strode across to his fire, seized a fistful of 
glittering powder from ajar on the fireplace, and 
threw it into the flames. 

“Lupin!” Snape called into the fire. “I want a word!” 

Utterly bewildered, Harry stared at the fire. A large 
shape had appeared in it, revolving very fast. Seconds 
later, Professor Lupin was clambering out of the 
fireplace, brushing ash off his shabby robes. 

“You called, Severus?” said Lupin mildly. 

“I certainly did,” said Snape, his face contorted with 
fury as he strode back to his desk. “I have just asked 
Potter to empty his pockets. He was carrying this.” 

Snape pointed at the parchment, on which the words 
of Messrs. Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs 
were still shining. An odd, closed expression appeared 
on Lupin’s face. 

“Well?” said Snape. 

Lupin continued to stare at the map. Harry had the 
impression that Lupin was doing some very quick 
thinking. 

“Well?” said Snape again. “This parchment is plainly 
full of Dark Magic. This is supposed to be your area of 
expertise, Lupin. Where do you imagine Potter got 
such a thing?” 

Lupin looked up and, by the merest half-glance in 
Harry’s direction, warned him not to interrupt. 

“Full of Dark Magic?” he repeated mildly. “Do you 
really think so, Severus? It looks to me as though it is 
merely a piece of parchment that insults anybody who 

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




reads it. Childish, but surely not dangerous? I 
imagine Harry got it from a joke shop — ” 

“Indeed?” said Snape. His jaw had gone rigid with 
anger. “You think a joke shop could supply him with 
such a thing? You don’t think it more likely that he 
got it directly from the manufacturers?” 

Harry didn’t understand what Snape was talking 
about. Nor, apparently, did Lupin. 

“You mean, by Mr. Wormtail or one of these people?” 
he said. “Harry, do you know any of these men?” 

“No,” said Harry quickly. 

“You see, Severus?” said Lupin, turning back to 
Snape. “It looks like a Zonko product to me — ” 

Right on cue, Ron came bursting into the office. He 
was completely out of breath, and stopped just short 
of Snape ’s desk, clutching the stitch in his chest and 
trying to speak. 

“I — gave — Harry — that — stuff,” he choked. 
“Bought — it ... in Zonko ’s ... ages — ago ...” 

“Well!” said Lupin, clapping his hands together and 
looking around cheerfully. “That seems to clear that 
up! Severus, I’ll take this back, shall I?” He folded the 
map and tucked it inside his robes. “Harry, Ron, 
come with me, I need a word about my vampire essay 
— excuse us, Severus — ” 

Harry didn’t dare look at Snape as they left his office. 
He, Ron, and Lupin walked all the way back into the 
entrance hall before speaking. Then Harry turned to 
Lupin. 



Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor, I — ” 



“I don’t want to hear explanations,” said Lupin 
shortly. He glanced around the empty entrance hall 
and lowered his voice. “I happen to know that this 
map was confiscated by Mr. Filch many years ago. 

Yes, I know it’s a map,” he said as Harry and Ron 
looked amazed. “I don’t want to know how it fell into 
your possession. I am, however, astounded that you 
didn’t hand it in. Particularly after what happened the 
last time a student left information about the castle 
lying around. And I can’t let you have it back, Harry.” 

Harry had expected that, and was too keen for 
explanations to protest. 

“Why did Snape think I’d got it from the 
manufacturers?” 

“Because ... ,” Lupin hesitated, “because these 
mapmakers would have wanted to lure you out of 
school. They’d think it extremely entertaining.” 

“Do you know them?” said Harry, impressed. 

“We’ve met,” he said shortly. He was looking at Harry 
more seriously than ever before. 

“Don’t expect me to cover up for you again, Harry. I 
cannot make you take Sirius Black seriously. But I 
would have thought that what you have heard when 
the dementors draw near you would have had more of 
an effect on you. Your parents gave their lives to keep 
you alive, Harry. A poor way to repay them — 
gambling their sacrifice for a bag of magic tricks.” 

He walked away, leaving Harry feeling worse by far 
than he had at any point in Snape ’s office. Slowly, he 
and Ron mounted the marble staircase. As Harry 

Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




passed the one-eyed witch, he remembered the 
Invisibility Cloak — it was still down there, but he 
didn’t dare go and get it. 



“It’s my fault,” said Ron abruptly. “I persuaded you to 
go. Lupin’s right, it was stupid, we shouldn’t’ve done 



it — ” 



He broke off; they reached the corridor where the 
security trolls were pacing, and Hermione was 
walking toward them. One look at her face convinced 
Harry that she had heard what had happened. His 
heart plummeted — had she told Professor 
McGonagall? 

“Come to have a good gloat?” said Ron savagely as 
she stopped in front of them. “Or have you just been 
to tell on us?” 

“No,” said Hermione. She was holding a letter in her 
hands and her lip was trembling. “I just thought you 
ought to know ... Hagrid lost his case. Buckbeak is 
going to be executed.” 



Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE QUIDDITCH FINAL 

“He — he sent me this,” Hermione said, holding out 
the letter. 

Harry took it. The parchment was damp, and 
enormous teardrops had smudged the ink so badly in 
places that it was very difficult to read. 

Dear Hermione, 

We lost I’m allowed to bring him back to Hogwarts. 
Execution date to be fixed. 

Beaky has enjoyed London. 

I won’t forget all the help you gave us. 

Hagrid 

“They can’t do this,” said Harry. “They can’t. 
Buckbeak isn’t dangerous.” 



Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“Malfoy’s dad’s frightened the Committee into it,” said 
Hermione, wiping her eyes. “You know what he’s like. 
They’re a bunch of doddery old fools, and they were 
scared. There’ll be an appeal, though, there always is. 
Only I can’t see any hope. ... Nothing will have 
changed.” 

“Yeah, it will,” said Ron fiercely. “You won’t have to do 
all the work alone this time, Hermione. I’ll help.” 

“Oh, Ron!” 

Hermione flung her arms around Ron’s neck and 
broke down completely. Ron, looking quite terrified, 
patted her very awkwardly on the top of the head. 
Finally, Hermione drew away. 

“Ron, I’m really, really sorry about Scabbers ... ,” she 
sobbed. 

“Oh — well — he was old,” said Ron, looking 
thoroughly relieved that she had let go of him. “And 
he was a bit useless. You never know, Mum and Dad 
might get me an owl now.” 

The safety measures imposed on the students since 
Black’s second break-in made it impossible for Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione to go and visit Hagrid in the 
evenings. Their only chance of talking to him was 
during Care of Magical Creatures lessons. 

He seemed numb with shock at the verdict. 

“S’all my fault. Got all tongue-tied. They was all sittin’ 
there in black robes an’ I kep’ droppin’ me notes and 
forgettin’ all them dates yeh looked up fer me, 
Hermione. An’ then Lucius Malfoy stood up an’ said 
his bit, and the Committee jus’ did exac’ly what he 
told ’em. ...” 

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“There’s still the appeal!” said Ron fiercely. “Don’t give 
up yet, we’re working on it!” 

They were walking back up to the castle with the rest 
of the class. Ahead they could see Malfoy, who was 
walking with Crabbe and Goyle, and kept looking 
back, laughing derisively. 

“S’no good, Ron,” said Hagrid sadly as they reached 
the castle steps. “That Committee’s in Lucius Malfoy ’s 
pocket. I’m jus’ gonna make sure the rest o’ Beaky’s 
time is the happiest he’s ever had. I owe him that. ...” 

Hagrid turned around and hurried back toward his 
cabin, his face buried in his handkerchief. 

“Look at him blubber!” 

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had been standing just 
inside the castle doors, listening. 

“Have you ever seen anything quite as pathetic?” said 
Malfoy. “And he’s supposed to be our teacher!” 

Harry and Ron both made furious moves toward 
Malfoy, but Hermione got there first — SMACK! 

She had slapped Malfoy across the face with all the 
strength she could muster. Malfoy staggered. Harry, 
Ron, Crabbe, and Goyle stood flabbergasted as 
Hermione raised her hand again. 

“Don’t you dare call Hagrid pathetic, you foul — you 
evil — ” 

“Hermione!” said Ron weakly, and he tried to grab her 
hand as she swung it back. 

“Get off, Ron!” 

Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione pulled out her wand. Malfoy stepped 
backward. Crabbe and Goyle looked at him for 
instructions, thoroughly bewildered. 

“C’mon,” Malfoy muttered, and in a moment, all three 
of them had disappeared into the passageway to the 
dungeons. 

“Hermionel” Ron said again, sounding both stunned 
and impressed. 

“Harry, you’d better beat him in the Quidditch final!” 
Hermione said shrilly. “You just better had, because I 
can’t stand it if Slytherin wins!” 

“We’re due in Charms,” said Ron, still goggling at 
Hermione. “We’d better go.” 

They hurried up the marble staircase toward 
Professor Flitwick’s classroom. 

“You’re late, boys!” said Professor Flitwick reprovingly 
as Harry opened the classroom door. “Come along, 
quickly, wands out, we’re experimenting with 
Cheering Charms today, we’ve already divided into 
pairs — ” 

Harry and Ron hurried to a desk at the back and 
opened their bags. Ron looked behind him. 

“Where’s Hermione gone?” 

Harry looked around too. Hermione hadn’t entered 
the classroom, yet Harry knew she had been right 
next to him when he had opened the door. 

“That’s weird,” said Harry, staring at Ron. “Maybe — 
maybe she went to the bathroom or something?” 



Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But Hermione didn’t turn up all lesson. 

“She could’ve done with a Cheering Charm on her 
too,” said Ron as the class left for lunch, all grinning 
broadly — the Cheering Charms had left them with a 
feeling of great contentment. 

Hermione wasn’t at lunch either. By the time they 
had finished their apple pie, the after-effects of the 
Cheering Charms were wearing off, and Harry and 
Ron had started to get slightly worried. 

“You don’t think Malfoy did something to her?” Ron 
said anxiously as they hurried upstairs toward 
Gryffindor Tower. 

They passed the security trolls, gave the Fat Lady the 
password (“Flibbertigibbet”), and scrambled through 
the portrait hole into the common room. 

Hermione was sitting at a table, fast asleep, her head 
resting on an open Arithmancy book. They went to sit 
down on either side of her. Harry prodded her awake. 

“Wh — what?” said Hermione, waking with a start 
and staring wildly around. “Is it time to go? W — 
which lesson have we got now? 

“Divination, but it’s not for another twenty minutes,” 
said Harry. “Hermione, why didn’t you come to 
Charms?” 

“What? Oh no!” Hermione squeaked. “I forgot to go to 
Charms!” 

“But how could you forget?” said Harry. “You were 
with us till we were right outside the classroom!” 



Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t believe it!” Hermione wailed. “Was Professor 
Flitwick angry? Oh, it was Malfoy, I was thinking 
about him and I lost track of things!” 

“You know what, Hermione?” said Ron, looking down 
at the enormous Arithmancy book Hermione had 
been using as a pillow. “I reckon you’re cracking up. 
You’re trying to do too much.” 

“No, I’m not!” said Hermione, brushing her hair out of 
her eyes and staring hopelessly around for her bag. “I 
just made a mistake, that’s all! I’d better go and see 
Professor Flitwick and say sorry. ... I’ll see you in 
Divination!” 

Hermione joined them at the foot of the ladder to 
Professor Trelawney’s classroom twenty minutes later, 
looking extremely harassed. 

“I can’t believe I missed Cheering Charms! And I bet 
they come up in our exams; Professor Flitwick hinted 
they might!” 

Together they climbed the ladder into the dim, stifling 
tower room. Glowing on every little table was a crystal 
ball full of pearly white mist. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione sat down together at the same rickety table. 

“I thought we weren’t starting crystal balls until next 
term,” Ron muttered, casting a wary eye around for 
Professor Trelawney, in case she was lurking nearby. 

“Don’t complain, this means we’ve finished 
palmistry,” Harry muttered back. “I was getting sick 
of her flinching every time she looked at my hands.” 

“Good day to you!” said the familiar, misty voice, and 
Professor Trelawney made her usual dramatic 
entrance out of the shadows. Parvati and Lavender 

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




quivered with excitement, their faces lit by the milky 
glow of their crystal ball. 



“I have decided to introduce the crystal ball a little 
earlier than I had planned,” said Professor Trelawney, 
sitting with her back to the fire and gazing around. 
“The fates have informed me that your examination in 
June will concern the Orb, and I am anxious to give 
you sufficient practice.” 

Hermione snorted. 

“Well, honestly ... ‘the fates have informed her’ ... who 
sets the exam? She does! What an amazing 
prediction!” she said, not troubling to keep her voice 
low. Harry and Ron choked back laughs. 

It was hard to tell whether Professor Trelawney had 
heard them, as her face was hidden in shadow. She 
continued, however, as though she had not. 

“Crystal gazing is a particularly refined art,” she said 
dreamily. “I do not expect any of you to See when first 
you peer into the Orb’s infinite depths. We shall start 
by practicing relaxing the conscious mind and 
external eyes” — Ron began to snigger uncontrollably 
and had to stuff his fist in his mouth to stifle the 
noise — “so as to clear the Inner Eye and the 
superconscious. Perhaps, if we are lucky, some of you 
will See before the end of the class.” 

And so they began. Harry, at least, felt extremely 
foolish, staring blankly at the crystal ball, trying to 
keep his mind empty when thoughts such as “this is 
stupid” kept drifting across it. It didn’t help that Ron 
kept breaking into silent giggles and Hermione kept 
tutting. 



Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Seen anything yet?” Harry asked them after a 
quarter of an hour’s quiet crystal gazing. 

“Yeah, there’s a burn on this table,” said Ron, 
pointing. “Someone’s spilled their candle.” 

“This is such a waste of time,” Hermione hissed. “I 
could be practicing something useful. I could be 
catching up on Cheering Charms — ” 

Professor Trelawney rustled past. 

“Would anyone like me to help them interpret the 
shadowy portents within their Orb?” she murmured 
over the clinking of her bangles. 

“I don’t need help,” Ron whispered. “It’s obvious what 
this means. There’s going to be loads of fog tonight.” 

Both Harry and Hermione burst out laughing. 

“Now, really!” said Professor Trelawney as everyone’s 
heads turned in their direction. Parvati and Lavender 
were looking scandalized. “You are disturbing the 
clairvoyant vibrations!” She approached their table 
and peered into their crystal ball. Harry felt his heart 
sinking. He was sure he knew what was coming — 

“There is something here!” Professor Trelawney 
whispered, lowering her face to the ball, so that it was 
reflected twice in her huge glasses. “Something 
moving . . . but what is it?” 

Harry was prepared to bet everything he owned, 
including his Firebolt, that it wasn’t good news, 
whatever it was. And sure enough — 

“My dear ... ,” Professor Trelawney breathed, gazing 
up at Harry. “It is here, plainer than ever before ... my 

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




dear, stalking toward you, growing ever closer ... the 
Gr — ” 



“Oh, for goodness’ sake!” said Hermione loudly. “Not 
that ridiculous Grim again\” 

Professor Trelawney raised her enormous eyes to 
Hermione ’s face. Parvati whispered something to 
Lavender, and they both glared at Hermione too. 
Professor Trelawney stood up, surveying Hermione 
with unmistakable anger. 

“I am sorry to say that from the moment you have 
arrived in this class, my dear, it has been apparent 
that you do not have what the noble art of Divination 
requires. Indeed, I don’t remember ever meeting a 
student whose mind was so hopelessly mundane.” 

There was a moment’s silence. Then — 

“Fine!” said Hermione suddenly, getting up and 
cramming Unfogging the Future back into her bag. 
“Fine!” she repeated, swinging the bag over her 
shoulder and almost knocking Ron off his chair. “I 
give up! I’m leaving!” 

And to the whole class’s amazement, Hermione strode 
over to the trapdoor, kicked it open, and climbed 
down the ladder out of sight. 

It took a few minutes for the class to settle down 
again. Professor Trelawney seemed to have forgotten 
all about the Grim. She turned abruptly from Harry 
and Ron’s table, breathing rather heavily as she 
tugged her gauzy shawl more closely to her. 

“Ooooo!” said Lavender suddenly, making everyone 
start. “Oooooo, Professor Trelawney, I’ve just 
remembered! You saw her leaving, didn’t you? Didn’t 

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




you, Professor? ‘Around Easter, one of our number will 
leave us forever*.’ You said it ages ago, Professor!” 

Professor Trelawney gave her a dewy smile. 

“Yes, my dear, I did indeed know that Miss Granger 
would be leaving us. One hopes, however, that one 
might have mistaken the Signs. ... The Inner Eye can 
be a burden, you know. ...” 

Lavender and Parvati looked deeply impressed, and 
moved over so that Professor Trelawney could join 
their table instead. 

“Some day Hermione’s having, eh?” Ron muttered to 
Harry, looking awed. 

“Yeah ...” 

Harry glanced into the crystal ball but saw nothing 
but swirling white mist. Had Professor Trelawney 
really seen the Grim again? Would he? The last thing 
he needed was another near-fatal accident, with the 
Quidditch final drawing ever nearer. 

The Easter holidays were not exactly relaxing. The 
third years had never had so much homework. Neville 
Longbottom seemed close to a nervous collapse, and 
he wasn’t the only one. 

“Call this a holiday!” Seamus Finnigan roared at the 
common room one afternoon. “The exams are ages 
away, what’re they playing at?” 

But nobody had as much to do as Hermione. Even 
without Divination, she was taking more subjects 
than anybody else. She was usually last to leave the 
common room at night, first to arrive at the library 



Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the next morning; she had shadows like Lupin’s 
under her eyes, and seemed constantly close to tears. 

Ron had taken over responsibility for Buckbeak’s 
appeal. When he wasn’t doing his own work, he was 
poring over enormously thick volumes with names 
like The Handbook of Hippogriff Psychology and Fowl 
or Foul? A Study of Hippogriff Brutality. He was so 
absorbed, he even forgot to be horrible to 
Crookshanks. 

Harry, meanwhile, had to fit in his homework around 
Quidditch practice every day, not to mention endless 
discussions of tactics with Wood. The Gryffindor- 
Slytherin match would take place on the first 
Saturday after the Easter holidays. Slytherin was 
leading the tournament by exactly two hundred 
points. This meant (as Wood constantly reminded his 
team) that they needed to win the match by more 
than that amount to win the Cup. It also meant that 
the burden of winning fell largely on Harry, because 
capturing the Snitch was worth one hundred and fifty 
points. 

“So you must catch it only if we’re more than fifty 
points up,” Wood told Harry constantly. “Only if we’re 
more than fifty points up, Harry, or we win the match 
but lose the Cup. You’ve got that, haven’t you? You 
must catch the Snitch only if we’re — ” 

“I KNOW, OLIVER!” Harry yelled. 

The whole of Gryffindor House was obsessed with the 
coming match. Gryffindor hadn’t won the Quidditch 
Cup since the legendary Charlie Weasley (Ron’s 
second oldest brother) had been Seeker. But Harry 
doubted whether any of them, even Wood, wanted to 
win as much as he did. The enmity between Harry 
and Malfoy was at its highest point ever. Malfoy was 
Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




still smarting about the mud-throwing incident in 
Hogsmeade and was even more furious that Harry 
had somehow wormed his way out of punishment. 
Harry hadn’t forgotten Malfoy’s attempt to sabotage 
him in the match against Ravenclaw, but it was the 
matter of Buckbeak that made him most determined 
to beat Malfoy in front of the entire school. 

Never, in anyone’s memory, had a match approached 
in such a highly charged atmosphere. By the time the 
holidays were over, tension between the two teams 
and their Houses was at the breaking point. A 
number of small scuffles broke out in the corridors, 
culminating in a nasty incident in which a Gryffindor 
fourth year and a Slytherin sixth year ended up in the 
hospital wing with leeks sprouting out of their ears. 

Harry was having a particularly bad time of it. He 
couldn’t walk to class without Slytherins sticking out 
their legs and trying to trip him up; Crabbe and Goyle 
kept popping up wherever he went, and slouching 
away looking disappointed when they saw him 
surrounded by people. Wood had given instructions 
that Harry should be accompanied everywhere he 
went, in case the Slytherins tried to put him out of 
action. The whole of Gryffindor House took up the 
challenge enthusiastically, so that it was impossible 
for Harry to get to classes on time because he was 
surrounded by a vast, chattering crowd. Harry was 
more concerned for his Firebolt’s safety than his own. 
When he wasn’t flying it, he locked it securely in his 
trunk and frequently dashed back up to Gryffindor 
Tower at break times to check that it was still there. 

All usual pursuits were abandoned in the Gryffindor 
common room the night before the match. Even 
Hermione had put down her books. 

“I can’t work, I can’t concentrate,” she said nervously. 

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was a great deal of noise. Fred and George 
Weasley were dealing with the pressure by being 
louder and more exuberant than ever. Oliver Wood 
was crouched over a model of a Quidditch field in the 
corner, prodding little figures across it with his wand 
and muttering to himself. Angelina, Alicia, and Katie 
were laughing at Fred’s and George’s jokes. Harry was 
sitting with Ron and Hermione, removed from the 
center of things, trying not to think about the next 
day, because every time he did, he had the horrible 
sensation that something very large was fighting to 
get out of his stomach. 

“You’re going to be fine,” Hermione told him, though 
she looked positively terrified. 

“You’ve got a Firebolti” said Ron. 

“Yeah ... ,” said Harry, his stomach writhing. 

It came as a relief when Wood suddenly stood up and 
yelled, “Team! Bed!” 



Harry slept badly. First he dreamed that he had 
overslept, and that Wood was yelling, “Where were 
you? We had to use Neville instead!” Then he dreamed 
that Malfoy and the rest of the Slytherin team arrived 
for the match riding dragons. He was flying at 
breakneck speed, trying to avoid a spurt of flames 
from Malfoy ’s steed’s mouth, when he realized he had 
forgotten his Firebolt. He fell through the air and 
woke with a start. 

It was a few seconds before Harry remembered that 
the match hadn’t taken place yet, that he was safe in 
bed, and that the Slytherin team definitely wouldn’t 
be allowed to play on dragons. He was feeling very 

Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




thirsty. Quietly as he could, he got out of his four- 
poster and went to pour himself some water from the 
silver jug beneath the window. 

The grounds were still and quiet. No breath of wind 
disturbed the treetops in the Forbidden Forest; the 
Whomping Willow was motionless and innocent- 
looking. It looked as though the conditions for the 
match would be perfect. 

Harry set down his goblet and was about to turn back 
to his bed when something caught his eye. An animal 
of some kind was prowling across the silvery lawn. 

Harry dashed to his bedside table, snatched up his 
glasses, and put them on, then hurried back to the 
window. It couldn’t be the Grim — not now — not 
right before the match — 

He peered out at the grounds again and, after a 
minute’s frantic searching, spotted it. It was skirting 
the edge of the forest now. ... It wasn’t the Grim at all 
...it was a cat. ... Harry clutched the window ledge in 
relief as he recognized the bottlebrush tail. It was only 
Crookshanks. ... 

Or was it only Crookshanks? Harry squinted, 
pressing his nose flat against the glass. Crookshanks 
seemed to have come to a halt. Harry was sure he 
could see something else moving in the shadow of the 
trees too. 

And just then, it emerged — a gigantic, shaggy black 
dog, moving stealthily across the lawn, Crookshanks 
trotting at its side. Harry stared. What did this mean? 
If Crookshanks could see the dog as well, how could it 
be an omen of Harry’s death? 

“Ron!” Harry hissed. “Ron! Wake up!” 

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Huh?” 



“I need you to tell me if you can see something!” 

“S’all dark, Harry,” Ron muttered thickly. “What’re 
you on about?” 

“Down here — ” 

Harry looked quickly back out of the window. 

Crookshanks and the dog had vanished. Harry 
climbed onto the windowsill to look right down into 
the shadows of the castle, but they weren’t there. 
Where had they gone? 

A loud snore told him Ron had fallen asleep again. 

Harry and the rest of the Gryffindor team entered the 
Great Hall the next day to enormous applause. Harry 
couldn’t help grinning broadly as he saw that both 
the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables were applauding 
them too. The Slytherin table hissed loudly as they 
passed. Harry noticed that Malfoy looked even paler 
than usual. 

Wood spent the whole of breakfast urging his team to 
eat, while touching nothing himself. Then he hurried 
them off to the field before anyone else had finished, 
so they could get an idea of the conditions. As they 
left the Great Hall, everyone applauded again. 

“Good luck, Harry!” called Cho. Harry felt himself 
blushing. 

“Okay — no wind to speak of — sun’s a bit bright, 
that could impair your vision, watch out for it — 

ground’s fairly hard, good, that’ll give us a fast kickoff 
?? 

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Wood paced the field, staring around with the team 
behind him. Finally, they saw the front doors of the 
castle open in the distance and the rest of the school 
spilling onto the lawn. 

“Locker rooms,” said Wood tersely. 

None of them spoke as they changed into their scarlet 
robes. Harry wondered if they were feeling like he 
was: as though he’d eaten something extremely 
wriggly for breakfast. In what seemed like no time at 
all, Wood was saying, “Okay, it’s time, let’s go — ” 

They walked out onto the field to a tidal wave of noise. 
Three-quarters of the crowd was wearing scarlet 
rosettes, waving scarlet flags with the Gryffindor lion 
upon them, or brandishing banners with slogans like 
“GO GRYFFINDOR!” and “LIONS FOR THE CUP!” 
Behind the Slytherin goal posts, however, two 
hundred people were wearing green; the silver serpent 
of Slytherin glittered on their flags, and Professor 
Snape sat in the very front row, wearing green like 
everyone else, and a very grim smile. 

“And here are the Gryffindors!” yelled Lee Jordan, 
who was acting as commentator as usual. “Potter, 

Bell, Johnson, Spinnet, Weasley, Weasley, and Wood. 
Widely acknowledged as the best team Hogwarts has 
seen in a good few years — ” 

Lee’s comments were drowned by a tide of “boos” from 
the Slytherin end. 

“And here come the Slytherin team, led by Captain 
Flint. He’s made some changes in the lineup and 
seems to be going for size rather than skill — ” 

More boos from the Slytherin crowd. Harry, however, 
thought Lee had a point. Malfoy was easily the 

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




smallest person on the Slytherin team; the rest of 
them were enormous. 



“Captains, shake hands!” said Madam Hooch. 

Flint and Wood approached each other and grasped 
each other’s hand very tightly; it looked as though 
each was trying to break the other’s fingers. 

“Mount your brooms!” said Madam Hooch. “Three ... 
two ... one ...” 

The sound of her whistle was lost in the roar from the 
crowd as fourteen brooms rose into the air. Harry felt 
his hair fly back off his forehead; his nerves left him 
in the thrill of the flight; he glanced around, saw 
Malfoy on his tail, and sped off in search of the 
Snitch. 

“And it’s Gryffindor in possession, Alicia Spinnet of 
Gryffindor with the Quaffle, heading straight for the 
Slytherin goal posts, looking good, Alicia! Argh, no — 
Quaffle intercepted by Warrington, Warrington of 
Slytherin tearing up the field — WHAM! — nice 
Bludger work there by George Weasley, Warrington 
drops the Quaffle, it’s caught by — Johnson, 
Gryffindor back in possession, come on, Angelina — 
nice swerve around Montague — duck, Angelina, 
that’s a Bludger] — SHE SCORES! TEN-ZERO TO 
GRYFFINDOR!” 

Angelina punched the air as she soared around the 
end of the field; the sea of scarlet below was 
screaming its delight — 

“OUCH!” 

Angelina was nearly thrown from her broom as 
Marcus Flint went smashing into her. 

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sorry!” said Flint as the crowd below booed. “Sorry, 
didn’t see her!” 

A moment later, Fred Weasley chucked his Beater’s 
club at the back of Flint’s head. Flint’s nose smashed 
into the handle of his broom and began to bleed. 

“That will do!” shrieked Madam Hooch, zooming 
between them. “Penalty shot to Gryffindor for an 
unprovoked attack on their Chaser! Penalty shot to 
Slytherin for deliberate damage to their Chaser!” 

“Come off it, Miss!” howled Fred, but Madam Hooch 
blew her whistle and Alicia flew forward to take the 
penalty. 

“Come on, Alicia!” yelled Lee into the silence that had 
descended on the crowd. “YES! SHE’S BEATEN THE 
KEEPER! TWENTY-ZERO TO GRYFFINDOR!” 

Harry turned the Firebolt sharply to watch Flint, still 
bleeding freely, fly forward to take the Slytherin 
penalty. Wood was hovering in front of the Gryffindor 
goal posts, his jaw clenched. 

“ ’Course, Wood’s a superb Keeper!” Lee Jordan told 
the crowd as Flint waited for Madam Hooch’s whistle. 
“Superb! Very difficult to pass — very difficult indeed 

— YES! I DONT BELIEVE IT! HE’S SAVED IT!” 

Relieved, Harry zoomed away, gazing around for the 
Snitch, but still making sure he caught every word of 
Lee’s commentary. It was essential that he hold 
Malfoy off the Snitch until Gryffindor was more than 
fifty points up — 

“Gryffindor in possession, no, Slytherin in possession 

— no! — Gryffindor back in possession and it’s Katie 



Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Bell, Katie Bell for Gryffindor with the Quaffle, she’s 
streaking up the field — THAT WAS DELIBERATE!” 



Montague, a Slytherin Chaser, had swerved in front of 
Katie, and instead of seizing the Quaffle had grabbed 
her head. Katie cartwheeled in the air, managed to 
stay on her broom, but dropped the Quaffle. 

Madam Hooch’s whistle rang out again as she soared 
over to Montague and began shouting at him. A 
minute later, Katie had put another penalty past the 
Slytherin Seeker. 

“THIRTY-ZERO! TAKE THAT, YOU DIRTY, CHEATING 



“Jordan, if you can’t commentate in an unbiased way 

— !” 

“I’m telling it like it is, Professor!” 

Harry felt a huge jolt of excitement. He had seen the 
Snitch — it was shimmering at the foot of one of the 
Gryffindor goal posts — but he mustn’t catch it yet — 
and if Malfoy saw it — 

Faking a look of sudden concentration, Harry pulled 
his Firebolt around and sped off toward the Slytherin 
end — it worked. Malfoy went haring after him, 
clearly thinking Harry had seen the Snitch there. ... 

WHOOSH. 

One of the Bludgers came streaking past Harry’s right 
ear, hit by the gigantic Slytherin Beater, Derrick. 

Then again — 

WHOOSH. 

Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The second Bludger grazed Harry’s elbow. The other 
Beater, Bole, was closing in. 

Harry had a fleeting glimpse of Bole and Derrick 
zooming toward him, clubs raised — 

He turned the Firebolt upward at the last second, and 
Bole and Derrick collided with a sickening crunch. 

“Ha haaa!” yelled Lee Jordan as the Slytherin Beaters 
lurched away from each other, clutching their heads. 
“Too bad, boys! You’ll need to get up earlier than that 
to beat a Firebolt! And it’s Gryffindor in possession 
again, as Johnson takes the Quaffle — Flint alongside 
her — poke him in the eye, Angelina! — it was a joke, 
Professor, it was a joke — oh no — Flint in 
possession, Flint flying toward the Gryffindor goal 
posts, come on now, Wood, save — !” 

But Flint had scored; there was an eruption of cheers 
from the Slytherin end, and Lee swore so badly that 
Professor McGonagall tried to tug the magical 
megaphone away from him. 

“Sorry, Professor, sorry! Won’t happen again! So, 
Gryffindor in the lead, thirty points to ten, and 
Gryffindor in possession — ” 

It was turning into the dirtiest game Harry had ever 
played in. Enraged that Gryffindor had taken such an 
early lead, the Slytherins were rapidly resorting to any 
means to take the Quaffle. Bole hit Alicia with his 
club and tried to say he’d thought she was a Bludger. 
George Weasley elbowed Bole in the face in 
retaliation. Madam Hooch awarded both teams 
penalties, and Wood pulled off another spectacular 
save, making the score forty-ten to Gryffindor. 



Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Snitch had disappeared again. Malfoy was still 
keeping close to Harry as he soared over the match, 
looking around for it — once Gryffindor was fifty 
points ahead — 

Katie scored. Fifty-ten. Fred and George Weasley were 
swooping around her, clubs raised, in case any of the 
Slytherins were thinking of revenge. Bole and Derrick 
took advantage of Fred’s and George’s absence to aim 
both Bludgers at Wood; they caught him in the 
stomach, one after the other, and he rolled over in the 
air, clutching his broom, completely winded. 

Madam Hooch was beside herself. 

“YOU DO NOT ATTACK THE KEEPER UNLESS THE 
QUAFFLE IS WITHIN THE SCORING AREA!” she 
shrieked at Bole and Derrick. “Gryffindor penalty!” 

And Angelina scored. Sixty-ten. Moments later, Fred 
Weasley pelted a Bludger at Warrington, knocking the 
Quaffle out of his hands; Alicia seized it and put it 
through the Slytherin goal — seventy-ten. 

The Gryffindor crowd below was screaming itself 
hoarse — Gryffindor was sixty points in the lead, and 
if Harry caught the Snitch now, the Cup was theirs. 
Harry could almost feel hundreds of eyes following 
him as he soared around the field, high above the rest 
of the game, with Malfoy speeding along behind him. 

And then he saw it. The Snitch was sparkling twenty 
feet above him. 

Harry put on a huge burst of speed; the wind was 
roaring in his ears; he stretched out his hand, but 
suddenly, the Firebolt was slowing down — 



Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Horrified, he looked around. Malfoy had thrown 
himself forward, grabbed hold of the Firebolt’s tail, 
and was pulling it back. 

“You — ” 

Harry was angry enough to hit Malfoy, but couldn’t 
reach — Malfoy was panting with the effort of holding 
onto the Firebolt, but his eyes were sparkling 
maliciously. He had achieved what he’d wanted to do 
— the Snitch had disappeared again. 

“Penalty! Penalty to Gryffindor! I’ve never seen such 
tactics!” Madam Hooch screeched, shooting up to 
where Malfoy was sliding back onto his Nimbus Two 
Thousand and One. 

“YOU CHEATING SCUM!” Lee Jordan was howling 
into the megaphone, dancing out of Professor 
McGonagall’s reach. “YOU FILTHY, CHEATING B — ” 

Professor McGonagall didn’t even bother to tell him 
off. She was actually shaking her finger in Malfoy’s 
direction, her hat had fallen off, and she too was 
shouting furiously. 

Alicia took Gryffindor’s penalty, but she was so angry 
she missed by several feet. The Gryffindor team was 
losing concentration and the Slytherins, delighted by 
Malfoy’s foul on Harry, were being spurred on to 
greater heights. 

“Slytherin in possession, Slytherin heading for goal — 
Montague scores — ” Lee groaned. “Seventy-twenty to 
Gryffindor. ...” 

Harry was now marking Malfoy so closely their knees 
kept hitting each other. Harry wasn’t going to let 
Malfoy anywhere near the Snitch. ... 

Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get out of it, Potter!” Malfoy yelled in frustration as 
he tried to turn and found Harry blocking him. 

“Angelina Johnson gets the Quaffle for Gryffindor, 
come on, Angelina, COME ON!” 

Harry looked around. Every single Slytherin player 
apart from Malfoy was streaking up the pitch toward 
Angelina, including the Slytherin Keeper — they were 
all going to block her — 

Harry wheeled the Firebolt around, bent so low he 
was lying flat along the handle, and kicked it forward. 
Like a bullet, he shot toward the Slytherins. 

“AAAAAAARRRGH ! ” 

They scattered as the Firebolt zoomed toward them; 
Angelina’s way was clear. 

“SHE SCORES! SHE SCORES! Gryffindor leads by 
eighty points to twenty!” 

Harry, who had almost pelted headlong into the 
stands, skidded to a halt in midair, reversed, and 
zoomed back into the middle of the field. 

And then he saw something to make his heart stand 
still. Malfoy was diving, a look of triumph on his face 
— there, a few feet above the grass below, was a tiny, 
golden glimmer — 

Harry urged the Firebolt downward, but Malfoy was 
miles ahead — 

“Go! Go! Go!” Harry urged his broom. He was gaining 
on Malfoy — Harry flattened himself to the broom 
handle as Bole sent a Bludger at him — he was at 
Malfoy’s ankles — he was level — 

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry threw himself forward, took both hands off his 
broom. He knocked Malfoy’s arm out of the way and 



“YES!” 

He pulled out of his dive, his hand in the air, and the 
stadium exploded. Harry soared above the crowd, an 
odd ringing in his ears. The tiny golden ball was held 
tight in his fist, beating its wings hopelessly against 
his fingers. 

Then Wood was speeding toward him, half-blinded by 
tears; he seized Harry around the neck and sobbed 
unrestrainedly into his shoulder. Harry felt two large 
thumps as Fred and George hit them; then 
Angelina’s, Alicia’s, and Katie’s voices, “We’ve won the 
Cup\ We’ve won the Cup\” Tangled together in a 
many-armed hug, the Gryffindor team sank, yelling 
hoarsely, back to earth. 

Wave upon wave of crimson supporters was pouring 
over the barriers onto the field. Hands were raining 
down on their backs. Harry had a confused 
impression of noise and bodies pressing in on him. 
Then he, and the rest of the team, were hoisted onto 
the shoulders of the crowd. Thrust into the light, he 
saw Hagrid, plastered with crimson rosettes — “Yeh 
beat ’em, Harry, yeh beat ’em! Wait till I tell 
Buckbeak!” There was Percy, jumping up and down 
like a maniac, all dignity forgotten. Professor 
McGonagall was sobbing harder even than Wood, 
wiping her eyes with an enormous Gryffindor flag; 
and there, fighting their way toward Harry, were Ron 
and Hermione. Words failed them. They simply 
beamed as Harry was borne toward the stands, where 
Dumbledore stood waiting with the enormous 
Quidditch Cup. 



Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




If only there had been a dementor around. ... As a 
sobbing Wood passed Harry the Cup, as he lifted it 
into the air, Harry felt he could have produced the 
world’s best Patronus. 



Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






PROFESSOR TRELAWNEY’S 
PREDICTION 

Harry’s euphoria at finally winning the Quidditch Cup 
lasted at least a week. Even the weather seemed to be 
celebrating; as June approached, the days became 
cloudless and sultry, and all anybody felt like doing 
was strolling onto the grounds and flopping down on 
the grass with several pints of iced pumpkin juice, 
perhaps playing a casual game of Gobstones or 
watching the giant squid propel itself dreamily across 
the surface of the lake. 

But they couldn’t. Exams were nearly upon them, and 
instead of lazing around outside, the students were 
forced to remain inside the castle, trying to bully their 
brains into concentrating while enticing wafts of 
summer air drifted in through the windows. Even 
Fred and George Weasley had been spotted working; 
they were about to take their O.W.L.s (Ordinary 
Wizarding Levels). Percy was getting ready to take his 
N.E.W.T.s (Nastily Exhausting Wizarding Tests), the 
highest qualification Hogwarts offered. As Percy 

Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



hoped to enter the Ministry of Magic, he needed top 
grades. He was becoming increasingly edgy, and gave 
very severe punishments to anybody who disturbed 
the quiet of the common room in the evenings. In fact, 
the only person who seemed more anxious than Percy 
was Hermione. 

Harry and Ron had given up asking her how she was 
managing to attend several classes at once, but they 
couldn’t restrain themselves when they saw the exam 
schedule she had drawn up for herself. The first 
column read: 

Monday 

9 o’clock, Arithmancy 
9 o’clock, Transfiguration 
Lunch 

1 o’clock, Charms 
1 o’clock, Ancient Runes 

“Hermione?” Ron said cautiously, because she was 
liable to explode when interrupted these days. “Er — 
are you sure you’ve copied down these times right?” 

“What?” snapped Hermione, picking up the exam 
schedule and examining it. “Yes, of course I have.” 

“Is there any point asking how you’re going to sit for 
two exams at once?” said Harry. 

“No,” said Hermione shortly. “Have either of you seen 
my copy of Numerology and Gramatica?” 



Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, yeah, I borrowed it for a bit of bedtime reading,” 
said Ron, but very quietly. Hermione started shifting 
heaps of parchment around on her table, looking for 
the book. Just then, there was a rustle at the window 
and Hedwig fluttered through it, a note clutched tight 
in her beak. 

“It’s from Hagrid,” said Harry, ripping the note open. 
“Buckbeak’s appeal — it’s set for the sixth.” 

“That’s the day we finish our exams,” said Hermione, 
still looking everywhere for her Arithmancy book. 

“And they’re coming up here to do it,” said Harry, still 
reading from the letter. “Someone from the Ministry of 
Magic and — and an executioner.” 

Hermione looked up, startled. 

“They’re bringing the executioner to the appeal! But 
that sounds as though they’ve already decided!” 

“Yeah, it does,” said Harry slowly. 

“They can’t!” Ron howled. “I’ve spent ages reading up 
on stuff for him; they can’t just ignore it all!” 

But Harry had a horrible feeling that the Committee 
for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures had had its 
mind made up for it by Mr. Malfoy. Draco, who had 
been noticeably subdued since Gryffindor’s triumph 
in the Quidditch final, seemed to regain some of his 
old swagger over the next few days. From sneering 
comments Harry overheard, Malfoy was certain 
Buckbeak was going to be killed, and seemed 
thoroughly pleased with himself for bringing it about. 
It was all Harry could do to stop himself imitating 
Hermione and hitting Malfoy in the face on these 
occasions. And the worst thing of all was that they 
Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




had no time or opportunity to go and see Hagrid, 
because the strict new security measures had not 
been lifted, and Harry didn’t dare retrieve his 
Invisibility Cloak from below the one-eyed witch. 

k k k 



Exam week began and an unnatural hush fell over 
the castle. The third years emerged from 
Transfiguration at lunchtime on Monday, limp and 
ashen-faced, comparing results and bemoaning the 
difficulty of the tasks they had been set, which had 
included turning a teapot into a tortoise. Hermione 
irritated the rest by fussing about how her tortoise 
had looked more like a turtle, which was the least of 
everyone else’s worries. 

“Mine still had a spout for a tail, what a nightmare. 



“Were the tortoises supposed to breathe steam?” 

“It still had a willow-patterned shell, d’you think 
that 11 count against me?” 

Then, after a hasty lunch, it was straight back 
upstairs for the Charms exam. Hermione had been 
right; Professor Flitwick did indeed test them on 
Cheering Charms. Harry slightly overdid his out of 
nerves and Ron, who was partnering him, ended up 
in fits of hysterical laughter and had to be led away to 
a quiet room for an hour before he was ready to 
perform the charm himself. After dinner, the students 
hurried back to their common rooms, not to relax, 
but to start studying for Care of Magical Creatures, 
Potions, and Astronomy. 



Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid presided over the Care of Magical Creatures 
exam the following morning with a very preoccupied 
air indeed; his heart didn’t seem to be in it at all. He 
had provided a large tub of fresh flobberworms for the 
class, and told them that to pass the test, their 
flobberworm had to still be alive at the end of one 
hour. As flobberworms flourished best if left to their 
own devices, it was the easiest exam any of them had 
ever taken, and also gave Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
plenty of opportunity to speak to Hagrid. 

“Beaky’s gettin’ a bit depressed,” Hagrid told them, 
bending low on the pretense of checking that Harry’s 
flobberworm was still alive. “Bin cooped up too long. 
But still ... we’ll know day after tomorrow — one way 
or the other — ” 

They had Potions that afternoon, which was an 
unqualified disaster. Try as Harry might, he couldn’t 
get his Confusing Concoction to thicken, and Snape, 
standing watch with an air of vindictive pleasure, 
scribbled something that looked suspiciously like a 
zero onto his notes before moving away. 

Then came Astronomy at midnight, up on the tallest 
tower; History of Magic on Wednesday morning, in 
which Harry scribbled everything Florean Fortescue 
had ever told him about medieval witch-hunts, while 
wishing he could have had one of Fortescue ’s choco- 
nut sundaes with him in the stifling classroom. 
Wednesday afternoon meant Herbology, in the 
greenhouses under a baking-hot sun; then back to 
the common room once more, with sunburnt necks, 
thinking longingly of this time next day, when it 
would all be over. 

Their second to last exam, on Thursday morning, was 
Defense Against the Dark Arts. Professor Lupin had 
compiled the most unusual exam any of them had 

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




ever taken; a sort of obstacle course outside in the 
sun, where they had to wade across a deep paddling 
pool containing a grindylow, cross a series of potholes 
full of Red Caps, squish their way across a patch of 
marsh while ignoring misleading directions from a 
hinkypunk, then climb into an old trunk and battle 
with a new boggart. 

“Excellent, Harry,” Lupin muttered as Harry climbed 
out of the trunk, grinning. “Full marks.” 

Flushed with his success, Harry hung around to 
watch Ron and Hermione. Ron did very well until he 
reached the hinkypunk, which successfully confused 
him into sinking waist-high into the quagmire. 
Hermione did everything perfectly until she reached 
the trunk with the boggart in it. After about a minute 
inside it, she burst out again, screaming. 

“Hermione!” said Lupin, startled. “What’s the matter?” 

“P — P — Professor McGonagall!” Hermione gasped, 
pointing into the trunk. “Sh — she said I’d failed 
everything!” 

It took a little while to calm Hermione down. When at 
last she had regained a grip on herself, she, Harry, 
and Ron went back to the castle. Ron was still slightly 
inclined to laugh at Hermione ’s boggart, but an 
argument was averted by the sight that met them on 
the top of the steps. 

Cornelius Fudge, sweating slightly in his pinstriped 
cloak, was standing there staring out at the grounds. 
He started at the sight of Harry. 

“Hello there, Harry!” he said. “Just had an exam, I 
expect? Nearly finished?” 



Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes,” said Harry. Hermione and Ron, not being on 
speaking terms with the Minister of Magic, hovered 
awkwardly in the background. 

“Lovely day,” said Fudge, casting an eye over the lake. 
“Pity ... pity ...” 

He sighed deeply and looked down at Harry. 

“I’m here on an unpleasant mission, Harry. The 
Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures 
required a witness to the execution of a mad 
hippogriff. As I needed to visit Hogwarts to check on 
the Black situation, I was asked to step in.” 

“Does that mean the appeal’s already happened?” Ron 
interrupted, stepping forward. 

“No, no, it’s scheduled for this afternoon,” said Fudge, 
looking curiously at Ron. 

“Then you might not have to witness an execution at 
all!” said Ron stoutly. “The hippogriff might get off!” 

Before Fudge could answer, two wizards came 
through the castle doors behind him. One was so 
ancient he appeared to be withering before their very 
eyes; the other was tall and strapping, with a thin 
black mustache. Harry gathered that they were 
representatives of the Committee for the Disposal of 
Dangerous Creatures, because the very old wizard 
squinted toward Hagrid’s cabin and said in a feeble 
voice, “Dear, dear, I’m getting too old for this. ... Two 
o’clock, isn’t it, Fudge?” 

The black-mustached man was fingering something in 
his belt; Harry looked and saw that he was running 
one broad thumb along the blade of a shining axe. 

Ron opened his mouth to say something, but 

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione nudged him hard in the ribs and jerked her 
head toward the entrance hall. 

“Why’d you stop me?” said Ron angrily as they 
entered the Great Hall for lunch. “Did you see them? 
They’ve even got the axe ready! This isn’t justice!” 

“Ron, your dad works for the Ministry, you can’t go 
saying things like that to his boss!” said Hermione, 
but she too looked very upset. “As long as Hagrid 
keeps his head this time, and argues his case 
properly, they can’t possibly execute Buckbeak. ...” 

But Harry could tell Hermione didn’t really believe 
what she was saying. All around them, people were 
talking excitedly as they ate their lunch, happily 
anticipating the end of the exams that afternoon, but 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione, lost in worry about Hagrid 
and Buckbeak, didn’t join in. 

Harry’s and Ron’s last exam was Divination; 
Hermione’s, Muggle Studies. They walked up the 
marble staircase together; Hermione left them on the 
first floor and Harry and Ron proceeded all the way 
up to the seventh, where many of their class were 
sitting on the spiral staircase to Professor Trelawney’s 
classroom, trying to cram in a bit of last-minute 
studying. 

“She’s seeing us all separately,” Neville informed them 
as they went to sit down next to him. He had his copy 
of Unfogging the Future open on his lap at the pages 
devoted to crystal gazing. “Have either of you ever 
seen anything in a crystal ball?” he asked them 
unhappily. 

“Nope,” said Ron in an offhand voice. He kept 
checking his watch; Harry knew that he was counting 
down the time until Buckbeak’s appeal started. 

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The line of people outside the classroom shortened 
very slowly. As each person climbed back down the 
silver ladder, the rest of the class hissed, “What did 
she ask? Was it okay?” 

But they all refused to say. 

“She says the crystal ball’s told her that if I tell you, 

I’ll have a horrible accident!” squeaked Neville as he 
clambered back down the ladder toward Harry and 
Ron, who had now reached the landing. 

“That’s convenient,” snorted Ron. “You know, I’m 
starting to think Hermione was right about her” — he 
jabbed his thumb toward the trapdoor overhead — 
“she’s a right old fraud.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, looking at his own watch. It was 
now two o’clock. “Wish she’d hurry up ...” 

Parvati came back down the ladder glowing with 
pride. 

“She says I’ve got all the makings of a true Seer,” she 
informed Harry and Ron. “I saw loads of stuff. ... Well, 
good luck!” 

She hurried off down the spiral staircase toward 
Lavender. 

“Ronald Weasley,” said the familiar, misty voice from 
over their heads. Ron grimaced at Harry and climbed 
the silver ladder out of sight. Harry was now the only 
person left to be tested. He settled himself on the floor 
with his back against the wall, listening to a fly 
buzzing in the sunny window, his mind across the 
grounds with Hagrid. 



Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Finally, after about twenty minutes, Ron’s large feet 
reappeared on the ladder. 

“How’d it go?” Harry asked him, standing up. 

“Rubbish,” said Ron. “Couldn’t see a thing, so I made 
some stuff up. Don’t think she was convinced, 
though. ...” 

“Meet you in the common room,” Harry muttered as 
Professor Trelawney’s voice called, “Harry Potter!” 

The tower room was hotter than ever before; the 
curtains were closed, the fire was alight, and the 
usual sickly scent made Harry cough as he stumbled 
through the clutter of chairs and tables to where 
Professor Trelawney sat waiting for him before a large 
crystal ball. 

“Good day, my dear,” she said softly. “If you would 
kindly gaze into the Orb. ... Take your time, now ... 
then tell me what you see within it. ...” 

Harry bent over the crystal ball and stared, stared as 
hard as he could, willing it to show him something 
other than swirling white fog, but nothing happened. 

“Well?” Professor Trelawney prompted delicately. 
“What do you see?” 

The heat was overpowering and his nostrils were 
stinging with the perfumed smoke wafting from the 
fire beside them. He thought of what Ron had just 
said, and decided to pretend. 

“Er — ” said Harry, “a dark shape ... um ...” 

“What does it resemble?” whispered Professor 
Trelawney. “Think, now ...” 

Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry cast his mind around and it landed on 
Buckbeak. 

“A hippogriff,” he said firmly. 

“Indeed!” whispered Professor Trelawney, scribbling 
keenly on the parchment perched upon her knees. 
“My boy, you may well be seeing the outcome of poor 
Hagrid’s trouble with the Ministry of Magic! Look 
closer. . . . Does the hippogriff appear to . . . have its 
head?” 

“Yes,” said Harry firmly. 

“Are you sure?” Professor Trelawney urged him. “Are 
you quite sure, dear? You don’t see it writhing on the 
ground, perhaps, and a shadowy figure raising an axe 
behind it?” 

“No!” said Harry, starting to feel slightly sick. 

“No blood? No weeping Hagrid?” 

“No!” said Harry again, wanting more than ever to 
leave the room and the heat. “It looks fine, it’s — 
flying away. ...” 

Professor Trelawney sighed. 

“Well, dear, I think we’ll leave it there. ... A little 
disappointing ... but I’m sure you did your best.” 

Relieved, Harry got up, picked up his bag and turned 
to go, but then a loud, harsh voice spoke behind him. 

“It will happen tonight.” 



Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry wheeled around. Professor Trelawney had gone 
rigid in her armchair; her eyes were unfocused and 
her mouth sagging. 

“S — sorry?” said Harry. 

But Professor Trelawney didn’t seem to hear him. Her 
eyes started to roll. Harry sat there in a panic. She 
looked as though she was about to have some sort of 
seizure. He hesitated, thinking of running to the 
hospital wing — and then Professor Trelawney spoke 
again, in the same harsh voice, quite unlike her own: 

“The Dark Lord lies alone and friendless, abandoned 
by his followers. His servant has been chained these 
twelve years. Tonight, before midnight ... the servant 
will break free and set out to rejoin his master. The 
Dark Lord will rise again with his servant’s aid, 
greater and more terrible than ever he was. Tonight ... 
before midnight . . . the servant . . . will set out ... to 
rejoin ... his master. ...” 

Professor Trelawney’s head fell forward onto her 
chest. She made a grunting sort of noise. Harry sat 
there, staring at her. Then, quite suddenly, Professor 
Trelawney’s head snapped up again. 

“I’m so sorry, dear boy,” she said dreamily, “the heat 
of the day, you know ... I drifted off for a moment. ...” 

Harry sat there, staring at her. 

“Is there anything wrong, my dear?” 

“You — you just told me that the — the Dark Lord’s 
going to rise again ... that his servant’s going to go 
back to him. ...” 

Professor Trelawney looked thoroughly startled. 

Page | 361 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“The Dark Lord? He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named? My 
dear boy, that’s hardly something to joke about. ... 
Rise again, indeed — ” 

“But you just said it! You said the Dark Lord — ” 

“I think you must have dozed off too, dear!” said 
Professor Trelawney. “I would certainly not presume 
to predict anything quite as far-fetched as that\” 

Harry climbed back down the ladder and the spiral 
staircase, wondering ... had he just heard Professor 
Trelawney make a real prediction? Or had that been 
her idea of an impressive end to the test? 

Five minutes later he was dashing past the security 
trolls outside the entrance to Gryffindor Tower, 
Professor Trelawney’s words still resounding in his 
head. People were striding past him in the opposite 
direction, laughing and joking, heading for the 
grounds and a bit of long-awaited freedom; by the 
time he had reached the portrait hole and entered the 
common room, it was almost deserted. Over in the 
corner, however, sat Ron and Hermione. 

“Professor Trelawney,” Harry panted, “just told me — ” 

But he stopped abruptly at the sight of their faces. 

“Buckbeak lost,” said Ron weakly. “Hagrid’s just sent 
this.” 

Hagrid’s note was dry this time, no tears had 
splattered it, yet his hand seemed to have shaken so 
much as he wrote that it was hardly legible. 

Lost appeal. They’re going to execute at sunset 



Nothing you can do. Don’t come down. 

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




I don’t want you to see it 
Hagrid 

“We’ve got to go,” said Harry at once. “He can’t just sit 
there on his own, waiting for the executioner!” 

“Sunset, though,” said Ron, who was staring out the 
window in a glazed sort of way. “We’d never be 
allowed ... ’specially you, Harry. ...” 

Harry sank his head into his hands, thinking. 

“If we only had the Invisibility Cloak. ...” 

“Where is it?” said Hermione. 

Harry told her about leaving it in the passageway 
under the one-eyed witch. 

"... if Snape sees me anywhere near there again, I’m 
in serious trouble,” he finished. 

“That’s true,” said Hermione, getting to her feet. “If he 
sees you. ... How do you open the witch’s hump 
again?” 

“You — you tap it and say, ‘Dissendium,’ ” said Harry. 
“But — ” 

Hermione didn’t wait for the rest of his sentence; she 
strode across the room, pushed open the Fat Lady’s 
portrait and vanished from sight. 

“She hasn’t gone to get it?” Ron said, staring after 
her. 



Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




She had. Hermione returned a quarter of an hour 
later with the silvery cloak folded carefully under her 
robes. 

“Hermione, I don’t know what’s gotten into you 
lately!” said Ron, astounded. “First you hit Malfoy, 
then you walk out on Professor Trelawney — ” 

Hermione looked rather flattered. 

They went down to dinner with everybody else, but 
did not return to Gryffindor Tower afterward. Harry 
had the cloak hidden down the front of his robes; he 
had to keep his arms folded to hide the lump. They 
skulked in an empty chamber off the entrance hall, 
listening, until they were sure it was deserted. They 
heard a last pair of people hurrying across the hall 
and a door slamming. Hermione poked her head 
around the door. 

“Okay,” she whispered, “no one there — cloak on — ” 

Walking very close together so that nobody would see 
them, they crossed the hall on tiptoe beneath the 
cloak, then walked down the stone front steps into 
the grounds. The sun was already sinking behind the 
Forbidden Forest, gilding the top branches of the 
trees. 

They reached Hagrid’s cabin and knocked. He was a 
minute in answering, and when he did, he looked all 
around for his visitor, pale-faced and trembling. 

“It’s us,” Harry hissed. “We’re wearing the Invisibility 
Cloak. Let us in and we can take it off.” 

“Yeh shouldn’ve come!” Hagrid whispered, but he 
stood back, and they stepped inside. Hagrid shut the 
door quickly and Harry pulled off the cloak. 

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid was not crying, nor did he throw himself upon 
their necks. He looked like a man who did not know 
where he was or what to do. This helplessness was 
worse to watch than tears. 

“Wan’ some tea?” he said. His great hands were 
shaking as he reached for the kettle. 

“Where’s Buckbeak, Hagrid?” said Hermione 
hesitantly. 

“I — I took him outside,” said Hagrid, spilling milk all 
over the table as he filled up the jug. “He’s tethered in 
me pumpkin patch. Thought he oughta see the trees 
an’ — an’ smell fresh air — before — ” 

Hagrid ’s hand trembled so violently that the milk jug 
slipped from his grasp and shattered all over the 
floor. 

“I’ll do it, Hagrid,” said Hermione quickly, hurrying 
over and starting to clean up the mess. 

“There’s another one in the cupboard,” Hagrid said, 
sitting down and wiping his forehead on his sleeve. 
Harry glanced at Ron, who looked back hopelessly. 

“Isn’t there anything anyone can do, Hagrid?” Harry 
asked fiercely, sitting down next to him. “Dumbledore 



“He’s tried,” said Hagrid. “He’s got no power ter 
overrule the Committee. He told ’em Buckbeak’s all 
right, but they’re scared. ... Yeh know what Lucius 
Malfoy’s like ... threatened ’em, I expect ... an’ the 
executioner, Macnair, he’s an old pal o’ Malfoy’s ... 
but it’ll be quick an’ clean ... an’ I’ll be beside him. ...” 



Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid swallowed. His eyes were darting all over the 
cabin as though looking for some shred of hope or 
comfort. 

“Dumbledore ’s gonna come down while it — while it 
happens. Wrote me this mornin’. Said he wants ter — 
ter be with me. Great man, Dumbledore. ...” 

Hermione, who had been rummaging in Hagrid ’s 
cupboard for another milk jug, let out a small, quickly 
stifled sob. She straightened up with the new jug in 
her hands, fighting back tears. 

“Well stay with you too, Hagrid,” she began, but 
Hagrid shook his shaggy head. 

“Yeh’re ter go back up ter the castle. I told yeh, I don’ 
wan’ yeh watchin’. An’ yeh shouldn’ be down here 
anyway. ... If Fudge an’ Dumbledore catch yeh out 
without permission, Harry, yehll be in big trouble.” 

Silent tears were now streaming down Hermione ’s 
face, but she hid them from Hagrid, bustling around 
making tea. Then, as she picked up the milk bottle to 
pour some into the jug, she let out a shriek. 

“Ron! I — I don’t believe it — it’s Scabbersl” 

Ron gaped at her. 

“What are you talking about?” 

Hermione carried the milk jug over to the table and 
turned it upside down. With a frantic squeak, and 
much scrambling to get back inside, Scabbers the rat 
came sliding out onto the table. 

“Scabbers!” said Ron blankly. “Scabbers, what are 
you doing here?” 

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He grabbed the struggling rat and held him up to the 
light. Scabbers looked dreadful. He was thinner than 
ever, large tufts of hair had fallen out leaving wide 
bald patches, and he writhed in Ron’s hands as 
though desperate to free himself. 

“It’s okay, Scabbers!” said Ron. “No cats! There’s 
nothing here to hurt you!” 

Hagrid suddenly stood up, his eyes fixed on the 
window. His normally ruddy face had gone the color 
of parchment. 

“They’re cornin’. ...” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione whipped around. A group 
of men was walking down the distant castle steps. In 
front was Albus Dumbledore, his silver beard 
gleaming in the dying sun. Next to him trotted 
Cornelius Fudge. Behind them came the feeble old 
Committee member and the executioner, Macnair. 

“Yeh gotta go,” said Hagrid. Every inch of him was 
trembling. “They mustn’ find yeh here. ... Go now. ...” 

Ron stuffed Scabbers into his pocket and Hermione 
picked up the cloak. 

“I’ll let yeh out the back way,” said Hagrid. 

They followed him to the door into his back garden. 
Harry felt strangely unreal, and even more so when 
he saw Buckbeak a few yards away, tethered to a tree 
behind Hagrid’s pumpkin patch. Buckbeak seemed to 
know something was happening. He turned his sharp 
head from side to side and pawed the ground 
nervously. 



Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s okay, Beaky,” said Hagrid softly. “It’s okay ...” He 
turned to Harry, Ron, and Hermione. “Go on,” he 
said. “Get goin’.” 

But they didn’t move. 

“Hagrid, we can’t — ” 

“Well tell them what really happened — ” 

“They can’t kill him — ” 

“Go!” said Hagrid fiercely. “It’s bad enough without 
you lot in trouble an’ all!” 

They had no choice. As Hermione threw the cloak 
over Harry and Ron, they heard voices at the front of 
the cabin. Hagrid looked at the place where they had 
just vanished from sight. 

“Go quick,” he said hoarsely. “Don’ listen. ...” 

And he strode back into his cabin as someone 
knocked at the front door. 

Slowly, in a kind of horrified trance, Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione set off silently around Hagrid’s house. As 
they reached the other side, the front door closed with 
a sharp snap. 

“Please, let’s hurry,” Hermione whispered. “I can’t 
stand it, I can’t bear it. ...” 

They started up the sloping lawn toward the castle. 
The sun was sinking fast now; the sky had turned to 
a clear, purple-tinged grey, but to the west there was 
a ruby-red glow. 

Ron stopped dead. 

Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, please, Ron,” Hermione began. 

“It’s Scabbers — he won’t — stay put — ” 

Ron was bent over, trying to keep Scabbers in his 
pocket, but the rat was going berserk; squeaking 
madly, twisting and flailing, trying to sink his teeth 
into Ron’s hand. 

“Scabbers, it’s me, you idiot, it’s Ron,” Ron hissed. 

They heard a door open behind them and men’s 
voices. 

“Oh, Ron, please let’s move, they’re going to do it!” 
Hermione breathed. 

“Okay — Scabbers, stay put — ” 

They walked forward; Harry, like Hermione, was 
trying not to listen to the rumble of voices behind 
them. Ron stopped again. 

“I can’t hold him — Scabbers, shut up, everyone’ll 
hear us — ” 

The rat was squealing wildly, but not loudly enough 
to cover up the sounds drifting from Hagrid’s garden. 
There was a jumble of indistinct male voices, a 
silence, and then, without warning, the unmistakable 
swish and thud of an axe. 

Hermione swayed on the spot. 

“They did it!” she whispered to Harry. “I d — don’t 
believe it — they did it!” 



Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






CAT, RAT, AND DOG 



Harry’s mind had gone blank with shock. The three of 
them stood transfixed with horror under the 
Invisibility Cloak. The very last rays of the setting sun 
were casting a bloody light over the long-shadowed 
grounds. Then, behind them, they heard a wild 
howling. 

“Hagrid,” Harry muttered. Without thinking about 
what he was doing, he made to turn back, but both 
Ron and Hermione seized his arms. 

“We can’t,” said Ron, who was paper-white. “He’ll be 
in worse trouble if they know we’ve been to see him. 



Hermione ’s breathing was shallow and uneven. 

“How — could — they?” she choked. “How could 
they?” 

“Come on,” said Ron, whose teeth seemed to be 
chattering. 

Page | 370 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



They set off back toward the castle, walking slowly to 
keep themselves hidden under the cloak. The light 
was fading fast now. By the time they reached open 
ground, darkness was settling like a spell around 
them. 

“Scabbers, keep still,” Ron hissed, clamping his hand 
over his chest. The rat was wriggling madly. Ron 
came to a sudden halt, trying to force Scabbers 
deeper into his pocket. “What’s the matter with you, 
you stupid rat? Stay still — OUCH! He bit me!” 

“Ron, be quiet!” Hermione whispered urgently. 
“Fudge’ll be out here in a minute — ” 

“He won’t — stay — put — ” 

Scabbers was plainly terrified. He was writhing with 
all his might, trying to break free of Ron’s grip. 

“What’s the matter with him?” 

But Harry had just seen — slinking toward them, his 
body low to the ground, wide yellow eyes glinting 
eerily in the darkness — Crookshanks. Whether he 
could see them or was following the sound of 
Scabbers’s squeaks, Harry couldn’t tell. 

“Crookshanks!” Hermione moaned. “No, go away, 
Crookshanks! Go away!” 

But the cat was getting nearer — 

“Scabbers — NO!” 

Too late — the rat had slipped between Ron’s 
clutching fingers, hit the ground, and scampered 
away. In one bound, Crookshanks sprang after him, 
and before Harry or Hermione could stop him, Ron 

Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




had thrown the Invisibility Cloak off himself and 
pelted away into the darkness. 



“Ron\” Hermione moaned. 

She and Harry looked at each other, then followed at 
a sprint; it was impossible to run full out under the 
cloak; they pulled it off and it streamed behind them 
like a banner as they hurtled after Ron; they could 
hear his feet thundering along ahead and his shouts 
at Crookshanks. 

“Get away from him — get away — Scabbers, come 
here — ” 

There was a loud thud. 

“Gotchal Get off, you stinking cat — ” 

Harry and Hermione almost fell over Ron; they 
skidded to a stop right in front of him. He was 
sprawled on the ground, but Scabbers was back in 
his pocket; he had both hands held tight over the 
quivering lump. 

“Ron — come on — back under the cloak — ” 

Hermione panted. “Dumbledore — the Minister — 
they’ll be coming back out in a minute — ” 

But before they could cover themselves again, before 
they could even catch their breath, they heard the 
soft pounding of gigantic paws. ... Something was 
bounding toward them, quiet as a shadow — an 
enormous, pale-eyed, jet-black dog. 

Harry reached for his wand, but too late — the dog 
had made an enormous leap and the front paws hit 
him on the chest; he keeled over backward in a whirl 
of hair; he felt its hot breath, saw inch-long teeth — 

Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But the force of its leap had carried it too far; it rolled 
off him. Dazed, feeling as though his ribs were 
broken, Harry tried to stand up; he could hear it 
growling as it skidded around for a new attack. 

Ron was on his feet. As the dog sprang back toward 
them he pushed Harry aside; the dog’s jaws fastened 
instead around Ron’s outstretched arm. Harry lunged 
forward, he seized a handful of the brute’s hair, but it 
was dragging Ron away as easily as though he were a 
rag doll — 

Then, out of nowhere, something hit Harry so hard 
across the face he was knocked off his feet again. He 
heard Hermione shriek with pain and fall too. 

Harry groped for his wand, blinking blood out of his 
eyes — 

“Lumos\” he whispered. 

The wandlight showed him the trunk of a thick tree; 
they had chased Scabbers into the shadow of the 
Whomping Willow and its branches were creaking as 
though in a high wind, whipping backward and 
forward to stop them going nearer. 

And there, at the base of the trunk, was the dog, 
dragging Ron backward into a large gap in the roots 
— Ron was fighting furiously, but his head and torso 
were slipping out of sight — 

“Ron!” Harry shouted, trying to follow, but a heavy 
branch whipped lethally through the air and he was 
forced backward again. 

All they could see now was one of Ron’s legs, which 
he had hooked around a root in an effort to stop the 
dog from pulling him farther underground — but a 

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




horrible crack cut the air like a gunshot; Ron’s leg 
had broken, and a moment later, his foot vanished 
from sight. 

“Harry — we’ve got to go for help — ” Hermione 
gasped; she was bleeding too; the Willow had cut her 
across the shoulder. 

“No! That thing’s big enough to eat him; we haven’t 
got time — ” 

“Harry — we’re never going to get through without 
help — ” 

Another branch whipped down at them, twigs 
clenched like knuckles. 

“If that dog can get in, we can,” Harry panted, darting 
here and there, trying to find a way through the 
vicious, swishing branches, but he couldn’t get an 
inch nearer to the tree roots without being in range of 
the tree’s blows. 

“Oh, help, help,” Hermione whispered frantically, 
dancing uncertainly on the spot, “please ...” 

Crookshanks darted forward. He slithered between 
the battering branches like a snake and placed his 
front paws upon a knot on the trunk. 

Abruptly, as though the tree had been turned to 
marble, it stopped moving. Not a leaf twitched or 
shook. 

“Crookshanks!” Hermione whispered uncertainly. She 
now grasped Harry’s arm painfully hard. “How did he 
know — ?” 



Page | 374 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He’s friends with that dog,” said Harry grimly. “I’ve 
seen them together. Come on — and keep your wand 
out — ” 

They covered the distance to the trunk in seconds, 
but before they had reached the gap in the roots, 
Crookshanks had slid into it with a flick of his 
bottlebrush tail. Harry went next; he crawled forward, 
headfirst, and slid down an earthy slope to the 
bottom of a very low tunnel. Crookshanks was a little 
way along, his eyes flashing in the light from Harry’s 
wand. Seconds later, Hermione slithered down beside 
him. 

“Where’s Ron?” she whispered in a terrified voice. 

“This way,” said Harry, setting off, bent-backed, after 
Crookshanks. 

“Where does this tunnel come out?” Hermione asked 
breathlessly from behind him. 

“I don’t know. ... It’s marked on the Marauder’s Map 
but Fred and George said no one’s ever gotten into it. 
...It goes off the edge of the map, but it looked like it 
was heading for Hogsmeade. ...” 

They moved as fast as they could, bent almost double; 
ahead of them, Crookshanks ’s tail bobbed in and out 
of view. On and on went the passage; it felt at least as 
long as the one to Honeydukes. ... All Harry could 
think of was Ron and what the enormous dog might 
be doing to him. ... He was drawing breath in sharp, 
painful gasps, running at a crouch. ... 

And then the tunnel began to rise; moments later it 
twisted, and Crookshanks had gone. Instead, Harry 
could see a patch of dim light through a small 
opening. 

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He and Hermione paused, gasping for breath, edging 
forward. Both raised their wands to see what lay 
beyond. 

It was a room, a very disordered, dusty room. Paper 
was peeling from the walls; there were stains all over 
the floor; every piece of furniture was broken as 
though somebody had smashed it. The windows were 
all boarded up. 

Harry glanced at Hermione, who looked very 
frightened but nodded. 

Harry pulled himself out of the hole, staring around. 
The room was deserted, but a door to their right stood 
open, leading to a shadowy hallway. Hermione 
suddenly grabbed Harry’s arm again. Her wide eyes 
were traveling around the boarded windows. 

“Harry,” she whispered, “I think we’re in the Shrieking 
Shack.” 

Harry looked around. His eyes fell on a wooden chair 
near them. Large chunks had been torn out of it; one 
of the legs had been ripped off entirely. 

“Ghosts didn’t do that,” he said slowly. 

At that moment, there was a creak overhead. 
Something had moved upstairs. Both of them looked 
up at the ceiling. Hermione ’s grip on Harry’s arm was 
so tight he was losing feeling in his fingers. He raised 
his eyebrows at her; she nodded again and let go. 

Quietly as they could, they crept out into the hall and 
up the crumbling staircase. Everything was covered 
in a thick layer of dust except the floor, where a wide 
shiny stripe had been made by something being 
dragged upstairs. 

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They reached the dark landing. 



“Nox,” they whispered together, and the lights at the 
end of their wands went out. Only one door was open. 
As they crept toward it, they heard movement from 
behind it; a low moan, and then a deep, loud purring. 
They exchanged a last look, a last nod. 

Wand held tightly before him, Harry kicked the door 
wide open. 

On a magnificent four-poster bed with dusty hangings 
lay Crookshanks, purring loudly at the sight of them. 
On the floor beside him, clutching his leg, which 
stuck out at a strange angle, was Ron. 

Harry and Hermione dashed across to him. 

“Ron — are you okay?” 

“Where’s the dog?” 

“Not a dog,” Ron moaned. His teeth were gritted with 
pain. “Harry, it’s a trap — ” 

“What — ” 

“He’s the dog ... he’s an Animagus. ...” 

Ron was staring over Harry’s shoulder. Harry wheeled 
around. With a snap, the man in the shadows closed 
the door behind them. 

A mass of filthy, matted hair hung to his elbows. If 
eyes hadn’t been shining out of the deep, dark 
sockets, he might have been a corpse. The waxy skin 
was stretched so tightly over the bones of his face, it 
looked like a skull. His yellow teeth were bared in a 
grin. It was Sirius Black. 

Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ ExpelliarmusV’ he croaked, pointing Ron’s wand at 
them. 

Harry’s and Hermione’s wands shot out of their 
hands, high in the air, and Black caught them. Then 
he took a step closer. His eyes were fixed on Harry. 

“I thought you’d come and help your friend,” he said 
hoarsely. His voice sounded as though he had long 
since lost the habit of using it. “Your father would 
have done the same for me. Brave of you, not to run 
for a teacher. I’m grateful ... it will make everything 
much easier. ...” 

The taunt about his father rang in Harry’s ears as 
though Black had bellowed it. A boiling hate erupted 
in Harry’s chest, leaving no place for fear. For the first 
time in his life, he wanted his wand back in his hand, 
not to defend himself, but to attack ... to kill. Without 
knowing what he was doing, he started forward, but 
there was a sudden movement on either side of him 
and two pairs of hands grabbed him and held him 
back. ... “No, Harry!” Hermione gasped in a petrified 
whisper; Ron, however, spoke to Black. 

“If you want to kill Harry, you’ll have to kill us too!” 
he said fiercely, though the effort of standing upright 
was draining him of still more color, and he swayed 
slightly as he spoke. 

Something flickered in Black’s shadowed eyes. 

“Lie down,” he said quietly to Ron. “You will damage 
that leg even more.” 

“Did you hear me?” Ron said weakly, though he was 
clinging painfully to Harry to stay upright. “You’ll 
have to kill all three of us!” 



Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“There’ll be only one murder here tonight,” said Black, 
and his grin widened. 



“Why’s that?” Harry spat, trying to wrench himself 
free of Ron and Hermione. “Didn’t care last time, did 
you? Didn’t mind slaughtering all those Muggles to 
get at Pettigrew. ... What’s the matter, gone soft in 
Azkaban?” 

“Harry!” Hermione whimpered. “Be quiet!” 

“HE KILLED MY MUM AND DAD!” Harry roared, and 
with a huge effort he broke free of Hermione ’s and 
Ron’s restraint and lunged forward — 

He had forgotten about magic — he had forgotten that 
he was short and skinny and thirteen, whereas Black 
was a tall, full-grown man — all Harry knew was that 
he wanted to hurt Black as badly as he could and 
that he didn’t care how much he got hurt in return — 

Perhaps it was the shock of Harry doing something so 
stupid, but Black didn’t raise the wands in time — 
one of Harry’s hands fastened over his wasted wrist, 
forcing the wand tips away; the knuckles of Harry’s 
other hand collided with the side of Black’s head and 
they fell, backward, into the wall — 

Hermione was screaming; Ron was yelling; there was 
a blinding flash as the wands in Black’s hand sent a 
jet of sparks into the air that missed Harry’s face by 
inches; Harry felt the shrunken arm under his fingers 
twisting madly, but he clung on, his other hand 
punching every part of Black it could find. 

But Black’s free hand had found Harry’s throat — 

“No,” he hissed, “I’ve waited too long — ” 

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The fingers tightened, Harry choked, his glasses 
askew. 

Then he saw Hermione ’s foot swing out of nowhere. 
Black let go of Harry with a grunt of pain; Ron had 
thrown himself on Black’s wand hand and Harry 
heard a faint clatter — 

He fought free of the tangle of bodies and saw his own 
wand rolling across the floor; he threw himself toward 
it but — 

“Argh!” 

Crookshanks had joined the fray; both sets of front 
claws had sunk themselves deep into Harry’s arm; 
Harry threw him off, but Crookshanks now darted 
toward Harry’s wand — 

“NO YOU DONT!” roared Harry, and he aimed a kick 
at Crookshanks that made the cat leap aside, 
spitting; Harry snatched up his wand and turned — 

“Get out of the way!” he shouted at Ron and 
Hermione. 

They didn’t need telling twice. Hermione, gasping for 
breath, her lip bleeding, scrambled aside, snatching 
up her and Ron’s wands. Ron crawled to the four- 
poster and collapsed onto it, panting, his white face 
now tinged with green, both hands clutching his 
broken leg. 

Black was sprawled at the bottom of the wall. His thin 
chest rose and fell rapidly as he watched Harry 
walking slowly nearer, his wand pointing straight at 
Black’s heart. 

“Going to kill me, Harry?” he whispered. 

Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stopped right above him, his wand still pointing 
at Black’s chest, looking down at him. A livid bruise 
was rising around Black’s left eye and his nose was 
bleeding. 

“You killed my parents,” said Harry, his voice shaking 
slightly, but his wand hand quite steady. 

Black stared up at him out of those sunken eyes. 

“I don’t deny it,” he said very quietly. “But if you knew 
the whole story.” 

“The whole story?” Harry repeated, a furious 
pounding in his ears. “You sold them to Voldemort. 
That’s all I need to know.” 

“You’ve got to listen to me,” Black said, and there was 
a note of urgency in his voice now. “You’ll regret it if 
you don’t. ... You don’t understand. ...” 

“I understand a lot better than you think,” said Harry, 
and his voice shook more than ever. “You never heard 
her, did you? My mum ... trying to stop Voldemort 
killing me ... and you did that ... you did it. ...” 

Before either of them could say another word, 
something ginger streaked past Harry; Crookshanks 
leapt onto Black’s chest and settled himself there, 
right over Black’s heart. Black blinked and looked 
down at the cat. 

“Get off,” he murmured, trying to push Crookshanks 
off him. 

But Crookshanks sank his claws into Black’s robes 
and wouldn’t shift. He turned his ugly, squashed face 
to Harry and looked up at him with those great yellow 
eyes. To his right, Hermione gave a dry sob. 

Page | 381 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stared down at Black and Crookshanks, his 
grip tightening on the wand. So what if he had to kill 
the cat too? It was in league with Black. ... If it was 
prepared to die, trying to protect Black, that wasn’t 
Harry’s business. ... If Black wanted to save it, that 
only proved he cared more for Crookshanks than for 
Harry’s parents. ... 

Harry raised the wand. Now was the moment to do it. 
Now was the moment to avenge his mother and 
father. He was going to kill Black. He had to kill 
Black. This was his chance. ... 

The seconds lengthened. And still Harry stood frozen 
there, wand poised, Black staring up at him, 
Crookshanks on his chest. Ron’s ragged breathing 
came from near the bed; Hermione was quite silent. 

And then came a new sound — 

Muffled footsteps were echoing up through the floor 
— someone was moving downstairs. 

“WE’RE UP HERE!” Hermione screamed suddenly. 
“WE’RE UP HERE — SIRIUS BLACK — QUICK!” 

Black made a startled movement that almost 
dislodged Crookshanks; Harry gripped his wand 
convulsively — Do it nouA said a voice in his head — 
but the footsteps were thundering up the stairs and 
Harry still hadn’t done it. 

The door of the room burst open in a shower of red 
sparks and Harry wheeled around as Professor Lupin 
came hurtling into the room, his face bloodless, his 
wand raised and ready. His eyes flickered over Ron, 
lying on the floor, over Hermione, cowering next to the 
door, to Harry, standing there with his wand covering 



Page | 382 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black, and then to Black himself, crumpled and 
bleeding at Harry’s feet. 

“ ExpelliarmusV’ Lupin shouted. 

Harry’s wand flew once more out of his hand; so did 
the two Hermione was holding. Lupin caught them all 
deftly, then moved into the room, staring at Black, 
who still had Crookshanks lying protectively across 
his chest. 

Harry stood there, feeling suddenly empty. He hadn’t 
done it. His nerve had failed him. Black was going to 
be handed back to the dementors. 

Then Lupin spoke, in a very tense voice. 

“Where is he, Sirius?” 

Harry looked quickly at Lupin. He didn’t understand 
what Lupin meant. Who was Lupin talking about? He 
turned to look at Black again. 

Black’s face was quite expressionless. For a few 
seconds, he didn’t move at all. Then, very slowly, he 
raised his empty hand and pointed straight at Ron. 
Mystified, Harry glanced around at Ron, who looked 
bewildered. 

“But then ... ,” Lupin muttered, staring at Black so 
intently it seemed he was trying to read his mind, "... 
why hasn’t he shown himself before now? Unless” — 
Lupin’s eyes suddenly widened, as though he was 
seeing something beyond Black, something none of 
the rest could see, “ — unless he was the one ... 
unless you switched . . . without telling me?” 

Very slowly, his sunken gaze never leaving Lupin’s 
face, Black nodded. 

Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor,” Harry interrupted loudly, “what’s going 
on — ?” 

But he never finished the question, because what he 
saw made his voice die in his throat. Lupin was 
lowering his wand, gazing fixedly at Black. The 
Professor walked to Black’s side, seized his hand, 
pulled him to his feet so that Crookshanks fell to the 
floor, and embraced Black like a brother. 

Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out of 
his stomach. 

“I DONT BELIEVE IT!” Hermione screamed. 

Lupin let go of Black and turned to her. She had 
raised herself off the floor and was pointing at Lupin, 
wild-eyed. “You — you — ” 

“Hermione — ” 

“ — you and him!” 

“Hermione, calm down — ” 

“I didn’t tell anyone!” Hermione shrieked. “I’ve been 
covering up for you — ” 

“Hermione, listen to me, please!” Lupin shouted. “I 
can explain — ” 

Harry could feel himself shaking, not with fear, but 
with a fresh wave of fury. 

“I trusted you,” he shouted at Lupin, his voice 
wavering out of control, “and all the time you’ve been 
his friend!” 



Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re wrong,” said Lupin. “I haven’t been Sirius’s 
friend, but I am now — Let me explain. ...” 

“NO!” Hermione screamed. “Harry, don’t trust him, 
he’s been helping Black get into the castle, he wants 
you dead too — he’s a werewolf.” 

There was a ringing silence. Everyone’s eyes were now 
on Lupin, who looked remarkably calm, though rather 
pale. 

“Not at all up to your usual standard, Hermione,” he 
said. “Only one out of three, I’m afraid. I have not 
been helping Sirius get into the castle and I certainly 
don’t want Harry dead. ...” An odd shiver passed over 
his face. “But I won’t deny that I am a werewolf.” 

Ron made a valiant effort to get up again but fell back 
with a whimper of pain. Lupin made toward him, 
looking concerned, but Ron gasped, 

“Get away from me, werewolf” 

Lupin stopped dead. Then, with an obvious effort, he 
turned to Hermione and said, “How long have you 
known?” 

“Ages,” Hermione whispered. “Since I did Professor 
Snape’s essay. ...” 

“He’ll be delighted,” said Lupin coolly. “He assigned 
that essay hoping someone would realize what my 
symptoms meant. ... Did you check the lunar chart 
and realize that I was always ill at the full moon? Or 
did you realize that the boggart changed into the 
moon when it saw me?” 

“Both,” Hermione said quietly. 



Page | 385 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Lupin forced a laugh. 

“You’re the cleverest witch of your age I’ve ever met, 
Hermione.” 

“I’m not,” Hermione whispered. “If I’d been a bit 
cleverer, I’d have told everyone what you are!” 

“But they already know,” said Lupin. “At least, the 
staff do.” 

“Dumbledore hired you when he knew you were a 
werewolf?” Ron gasped. “Is he mad?” 

“Some of the staff thought so,” said Lupin. “He had to 
work very hard to convince certain teachers that I’m 
trustworthy — ” 

“AND HE WAS WRONG!” Harry yelled. “YOU VE BEEN 
HELPING HIM ALL THE TIME!” He was pointing at 
Black, who suddenly crossed to the four-poster bed 
and sank onto it, his face hidden in one shaking 
hand. Crookshanks leapt up beside him and stepped 
onto his lap, purring. Ron edged away from both of 
them, dragging his leg. 

“I have not been helping Sirius,” said Lupin. “If you’ll 
give me a chance, I’ll explain. Look — ” 

He separated Harry’s, Ron’s and Hermione’s wands 
and threw each back to its owner; Harry caught his, 
stunned. 

“There,” said Lupin, sticking his own wand back into 
his belt. “You’re armed, we’re not. Now will you 
listen?” 

Harry didn’t know what to think. Was it a trick? 



Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“If you haven’t been helping him,” he said, with a 
furious glance at Black, “how did you know he was 
here?” 



“The map,” said Lupin. “The Marauder’s Map. I was in 
my office examining it — ” 

“You know how to work it?” Harry said suspiciously. 

“Of course I know how to work it,” said Lupin, waving 
his hand impatiently. “I helped write it. I’m Moony — 
that was my friends’ nickname for me at school.” 

“You wrote — ?” 

“The important thing is, I was watching it carefully 
this evening, because I had an idea that you, Ron, 
and Hermione might try and sneak out of the castle to 
visit Hagrid before his hippogriff was executed. And I 
was right, wasn’t I?” 

He had started to pace up and down, looking at them. 
Little patches of dust rose at his feet. 

“You might have been wearing your father’s old cloak, 
Harry — ” 

“How d’you know about the cloak?” 

“The number of times I saw James disappearing 
under it... ,” said Lupin, waving an impatient hand 
again. “The point is, even if you’re wearing an 
Invisibility Cloak, you still show up on the Marauder’s 
Map. I watched you cross the grounds and enter 
Hagrid’s hut. Twenty minutes later, you left Hagrid, 
and set off back toward the castle. But you were now 
accompanied by somebody else.” 

“What?” said Harry. “No, we weren’t!” 

Page | 387 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I couldn’t believe my eyes,” said Lupin, still pacing, 
and ignoring Harry’s interruption. “I thought the map 
must be malfunctioning. How could he be with you?” 

“No one was with us!” said Harry. 

“And then I saw another dot, moving fast toward you, 
labeled Sirius Black. ... I saw him collide with you; I 
watched as he pulled two of you into the Whomping 
Willow — ” 

“One of us!” Ron said angrily. 

“No, Ron,” said Lupin. “Two of you.” 

He had stopped his pacing, his eyes moving over Ron. 

“Do you think I could have a look at the rat?” he said 
evenly. 

“What?” said Ron. “What’s Scabbers got to do with 
it?” 



“Everything,” said Lupin. “Could I see him, please?” 

Ron hesitated, then put a hand inside his robes. 
Scabbers emerged, thrashing desperately; Ron had to 
seize his long bald tail to stop him escaping. 
Crookshanks stood up on Black’s leg and made a soft 
hissing noise. 

Lupin moved closer to Ron. He seemed to be holding 
his breath as he gazed intently at Scabbers. 

“What?” Ron said again, holding Scabbers close to 
him, looking scared. “What’s my rat got to do with 
anything?” 

“That’s not a rat,” croaked Sirius Black suddenly. 

Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What d’you mean — of course he’s a rat — ” 

“No, he’s not,” said Lupin quietly. “He’s a wizard.” 

“An Animagus,” said Black, “by the name of Peter 
Pettigrew.” 



Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






MOONY, WORMTAIL, PADFOOT, AND 

PRONGS 

It took a few seconds for the absurdity of this 
statement to sink in. Then Ron voiced what Harry 
was thinking. 

“You’re both mental.” 

“Ridiculous!” said Hermione faintly. 

“Peter Pettigrew’s dead!” said Harry. “He killed him 
twelve years ago!” He pointed at Black, whose face 
twitched convulsively. 

“I meant to,” he growled, his yellow teeth bared, “but 
little Peter got the better of me ... not this time, 
though!” 

And Crookshanks was thrown to the floor as Black 
lunged at Scabbers; Ron yelled with pain as Black’s 
weight fell on his broken leg. 



Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sirius, NO!” Lupin yelled, launching himself forwards 
and dragging Black away from Ron again, “WAIT! You 
can’t do it just like that — they need to understand — 
we’ve got to explain — ” 

“We can explain afterwards!” snarled Black, trying to 
throw Lupin off. One hand was still clawing the air as 
it tried to reach Scabbers, who was squealing like a 
piglet, scratching Ron’s face and neck as he tried to 
escape. 

“They’ve — got — a — right — to — know — 
everything!” Lupin panted, still trying to restrain 
Black. “Ron’s kept him as a pet! There are parts of it 
even I don’t understand! And Harry — you owe Harry 
the truth, Sirius!” 

Black stopped struggling, though his hollowed eyes 
were still fixed on Scabbers, who was clamped tightly 
under Ron’s bitten, scratched, and bleeding hands. 

“All right, then,” Black said, without taking his eyes 
off the rat. “Tell them whatever you like. But make it 
quick, Remus. I want to commit the murder I was 
imprisoned for. ...” 

“You’re nutters, both of you,” said Ron shakily, 
looking round at Harry and Hermione for support. 

“I’ve had enough of this. I’m off.” 

He tried to heave himself up on his good leg, but 
Lupin raised his wand again, pointing it at Scabbers. 

“You’re going to hear me out, Ron,” he said quietly. 
“Just keep a tight hold on Peter while you listen.” 

“HE’S NOT PETER, HE’S SCABBERS!” Ron yelled, 
trying to force the rat back into his front pocket, but 
Scabbers was fighting too hard; Ron swayed and 

Page | 391 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




overbalanced, and Harry caught him and pushed him 
back down to the bed. Then, ignoring Black, Harry 
turned to Lupin. 

“There were witnesses who saw Pettigrew die,” he 
said. “A whole street full of them ...” 

“They didn’t see what they thought they saw!” said 
Black savagely, still watching Scabbers struggling in 
Ron’s hands. 

“Everyone thought Sirius killed Peter,” said Lupin, 
nodding. “I believed it myself — until I saw the map 
tonight. Because the Marauder’s map never lies ... 
Peter’s alive. Ron’s holding him, Harry.” 

Harry looked down at Ron, and as their eyes met, 
they agreed, silently: Black and Lupin were both out 
of their minds. Their story made no sense whatsoever. 
How could Scabbers be Peter Pettigrew? Azkaban 
must have unhinged Black after all — but why was 
Lupin playing along with him? 

Then Hermione spoke, in a trembling, would-be calm 
sort of voice, as though trying to will Professor Lupin 
to talk sensibly. 

“But Professor Lupin ... Scabbers can’t be Pettigrew 
... it just can’t be true, you know it can’t ...” 

“Why can’t it be true?” Lupin said calmly, as though 
they were in class, and Hermione had simply spotted 
a problem in an experiment with grindylows. 

“Because . . . because people would know if Peter 
Pettigrew had been an Animagus. We did Animagi in 
class with Professor McGonagall. And I looked them 
up when I did my homework — the Ministry of Magic 
keeps tabs on witches and wizards who can become 
Page | 392 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




animals; there’s a register showing what animal they 
become, and their markings and things ... and I went 
and looked Professor McGonagall up on the register, 
and there have been only seven Animagi this century, 
and Pettigrew’s name wasn’t on the list — ” 

Harry had barely had time to marvel inwardly at the 
effort Hermione put into her homework, when Lupin 
started to laugh. “Right again, Hermione!” he said. 
“But the Ministry never knew that there used to be 
three unregistered Animagi running around 
Hogwarts.” 

“If you’re going to tell them the story, get a move on, 
Remus,” snarled Black, who was still watching 
Scabbers’s every desperate move. “I’ve waited twelve 
years, I’m not going to wait much longer.” 

“All right ... but you’ll need to help me, Sirius,” said 
Lupin, “I only know how it began ...” 

Lupin broke off. There had been a loud creak behind 
him. The bedroom door had opened of its own accord. 
All five of them stared at it. Then Lupin strode toward 
it and looked out into the landing. 

“No one there ...” 

“This place is haunted!” said Ron. 

“It’s not,” said Lupin, still looking at the door in a 
puzzled way. “The Shrieking Shack was never 
haunted. ... The screams and howls the villagers used 
to hear were made by me.” 

He pushed his graying hair out of his eyes, thought 
for a moment, then said, “That’s where all of this 
starts — with my becoming a werewolf. None of this 



Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




could have happened if I hadn’t been bitten ... and if I 
hadn’t been so foolhardy. ...” 

He looked sober and tired. Ron started to interrupt, 
but Hermione said, “Shh!” She was watching Lupin 
very intently. 

“I was a very small boy when I received the bite. My 
parents tried everything, but in those days there was 
no cure. The potion that Professor Snape has been 
making for me is a very recent discovery. It makes me 
safe, you see. As long as I take it in the week 
preceding the full moon, I keep my mind when I 
transform. ... I am able to curl up in my office, a 
harmless wolf, and wait for the moon to wane again. 

“Before the Wolfsbane Potion was discovered, 
however, I became a fully fledged monster once a 
month. It seemed impossible that I would be able to 
come to Hogwarts. Other parents weren’t likely to 
want their children exposed to me. 

“But then Dumbledore became Headmaster, and he 
was sympathetic. He said that as long as we took 
certain precautions, there was no reason I shouldn’t 
come to school. ...” Lupin sighed, and looked directly 
at Harry. “I told you, months ago, that the Whomping 
Willow was planted the year I came to Hogwarts. The 
truth is that it was planted because I came to 
Hogwarts. This house” — Lupin looked miserably 
around the room, — “the tunnel that leads to it — 
they were built for my use. Once a month, I was 
smuggled out of the castle, into this place, to 
transform. The tree was placed at the tunnel mouth 
to stop anyone coming across me while I was 
dangerous.” 

Harry couldn’t see where this story was going, but he 
was listening raptly all the same. The only sound 

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




apart from Lupin’s voice was Scabbers’s frightened 
squeaking. 



“My transformations in those days were — were 
terrible. It is very painful to turn into a werewolf. I 
was separated from humans to bite, so I bit and 
scratched myself instead. The villagers heard the 
noise and the screaming and thought they were 
hearing particularly violent spirits. Dumbledore 
encouraged the rumor. . . . Even now, when the house 
has been silent for years, the villagers don’t dare 
approach it. ... 

“But apart from my transformations, I was happier 
than I had ever been in my life. For the first time ever, 
I had friends, three great friends. Sirius Black ... 

Peter Pettigrew ... and, of course, your father, Harry 
— James Potter. 

“Now, my three friends could hardly fail to notice that 
I disappeared once a month. I made up all sorts of 
stories. I told them my mother was ill, and that I had 
to go home to see her. ... I was terrified they would 
desert me the moment they found out what I was. But 
of course, they, like you, Hermione, worked out the 
truth. ... 

“And they didn’t desert me at all. Instead, they did 
something for me that would make my 
transformations not only bearable, but the best times 
of my life. They became Animagi.” 

“My dad too?” said Harry, astounded. 

“Yes, indeed,” said Lupin. “It took them the best part 
of three years to work out how to do it. Your father 
and Sirius here were the cleverest students in the 
school, and lucky they were, because the Animagus 
transformation can go horribly wrong — one reason 
Page | 395 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the Ministry keeps a close watch on those attempting 
to do it. Peter needed all the help he could get from 
James and Sirius. Finally, in our fifth year, they 
managed it. They could each turn into a different 
animal at will.” 

“But how did that help you?” said Hermione, 
sounding puzzled. 

“They couldn’t keep me company as humans, so they 
kept me company as animals,” said Lupin. “A 
werewolf is only a danger to people. They sneaked out 
of the castle every month under James’s Invisibility 
Cloak. They transformed . . . Peter, as the smallest, 
could slip beneath the Willow’s attacking branches 
and touch the knot that freezes it. They would then 
slip down the tunnel and join me. Under their 
influence, I became less dangerous. My body was still 
wolfish, but my mind seemed to become less so while 
I was with them.” 

“Hurry up, Remus,” snarled Black, who was still 
watching Scabbers with a horrible sort of hunger on 
his face. 

“I’m getting there, Sirius, I’m getting there ... well, 
highly exciting possibilities were open to us now that 
we could all transform. Soon we were leaving the 
Shrieking Shack and roaming the school grounds and 
the village by night. Sirius and James transformed 
into such large animals, they were able to keep a 
werewolf in check. I doubt whether any Hogwarts 
students ever found out more about the Hogwarts 
grounds and Hogsmeade than we did. ... And that’s 
how we came to write the Marauder’s Map, and sign it 
with our nicknames. Sirius is Padfoot. Peter is 
Wormtail. James was Prongs.” 



Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What sort of animal — ?” Harry began, but Hermione 
cut him off. 

“That was still really dangerous! Running around in 
the dark with a werewolf! What if you’d given the 
others the slip, and bitten somebody?” 

“A thought that still haunts me,” said Lupin heavily. 
“And there were near misses, many of them. We 
laughed about them afterwards. We were young, 
thoughtless — carried away with our own cleverness.” 

“I sometimes felt guilty about betraying Dumbledore’s 
trust, of course ... he had admitted me to Hogwarts 
when no other headmaster would have done so, and 
he had no idea I was breaking the rules he had set 
down for my own and others’ safety. He never knew I 
had led three fellow students into becoming Animagi 
illegally. But I always managed to forget my guilty 
feelings every time we sat down to plan our next 
month’s adventure. And I haven’t changed ...” 

Lupin’s face had hardened, and there was self-disgust 
in his voice. “All this year, I have been battling with 
myself, wondering whether I should tell Dumbledore 
that Sirius was an Animagus. But I didn’t do it. Why? 
Because I was too cowardly. It would have meant 
admitting that I’d betrayed his trust while I was at 
school, admitting that I’d led others along with me ... 
and Dumbledore’s trust has meant everything to me. 
He let me into Hogwarts as a boy, and he gave me a 
job when I have been shunned all my adult life, 
unable to find paid work because of what I am. And 
so I convinced myself that Sirius was getting into the 
school using dark arts he learned from Voldemort, 
that being an Animagus had nothing to do with it . . . 
so, in a way, Snape’s been right about me all along.” 



Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Snape?” said Black harshly, taking his eyes off 
Scabbers for the first time in minutes and looking up 
at Lupin. “What’s Snape got to do with it?” 

“He’s here, Sirius,” said Lupin heavily. “He’s teaching 
here as well.” He looked up at Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione. 

“Professor Snape was at school with us. He fought 
very hard against my appointment to the Defense 
Against the Dark Arts job. He has been telling 
Dumbledore all year that I am not to be trusted. He 
has his reasons ... you see, Sirius here played a trick 
on him which nearly killed him, a trick which 
involved me — ” 

Black made a derisive noise. 

“It served him right,” he sneered. “Sneaking around, 
trying to find out what we were up to . . . hoping he 
could get us expelled. ...” 

“Severus was very interested in where I went every 
month.” Lupin told Harry, Ron, and Hermione. “We 
were in the same year, you know, and we — er — 
didn’t like each other very much. He especially 
disliked James. Jealous, I think, of James’s talent on 
the Quidditch field . . . anyway Snape had seen me 
crossing the grounds with Madam Pomfrey one 
evening as she led me toward the Whomping Willow 
to transform. Sirius thought it would be — er — 
amusing, to tell Snape all he had to do was prod the 
knot on the tree trunk with a long stick, and he’d be 
able to get in after me. Well, of course, Snape tried it 
— if he’d got as far as this house, he’d have met a 
fully grown werewolf — but your father, who’d heard 
what Sirius had done, went after Snape and pulled 
him back, at great risk to his life . . . Snape glimpsed 
me, though, at the end of the tunnel. He was 
Page | 398 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




forbidden by Dumbledore to tell anybody, but from 
that time on he knew what I was. ...” 

“So that’s why Snape doesn’t like you,” said Harry 
slowly, “because he thought you were in on the joke?” 

“That’s right,” sneered a cold voice from the wall 
behind Lupin. 

Severus Snape was pulling off the Invisibility Cloak, 
his wand pointing directly at Lupin. 



Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 








THE SERVANT OF LORD 
VOLDERMORT 

Hermione screamed. Black leapt to his feet. Harry felt 
as though he’d received a huge electric shock. 

“I found this at the base of the Whomping Willow,” 
said Snape, throwing the cloak aside, careful to keep 
this wand pointing directly at Lupin’s chest. “Very 
useful, Potter, I thank you. ...” 

Snape was slightly breathless, but his face was full of 
suppressed triumph. “You’re wondering, perhaps, 
how I knew you were here?” he said, his eyes 
glittering. “I’ve just been to your office, Lupin. You 
forgot to take your potion tonight, so I took a gobletful 
along. And very lucky I did ... lucky for me, I mean. 
Lying on your desk was a certain map. One glance at 
it told me all I needed to know. I saw you running 
along this passageway and out of sight.” 

“Severus — ” Lupin began, but Snape overrode him. 



Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“I’ve told the headmaster again and again that you’re 
helping your old friend Black into the castle, Lupin, 
and here’s the proof. Not even I dreamed you would 
have the nerve to use this old place as your hideout 



“Severus, you’re making a mistake,” said Lupin 
urgently. “You haven’t heard everything — I can 
explain — Sirius is not here to kill Harry — ” 

“Two more for Azkaban tonight,” said Snape, his eyes 
now gleaming fanatically. “I shall be interested to see 
how Dumbledore takes this. ... He was quite 
convinced you were harmless, you know, Lupin ... a 
tame werewolf — ” 

“You fool,” said Lupin softly. “Is a schoolboy grudge 
worth putting an innocent man back inside 
Azkaban?” 

BANG! Thin, snakelike cords burst from the end of 
Snape’s wand and twisted themselves around Lupin’s 
mouth, wrists, and ankles; he overbalanced and fell 
to the floor, unable to move. With a roar of rage, 

Black started toward Snape, but Snape pointed his 
wand straight between Black’s eyes. 

“Give me a reason,” he whispered. “Give me a reason 
to do it, and I swear I will.” 

Black stopped dead. It would have been impossible to 
say which face showed more hatred. 

Harry stood there, paralyzed, not knowing what to do 
or whom to believe. He glanced around at Ron and 
Hermione. Ron looked just as confused as he did, still 
fighting to keep hold on the struggling Scabbers. 
Hermione, however, took an uncertain step toward 
Snape and said, in a very breathless voice, “Professor 
Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Snape — it — it wouldn’t hurt to hear what they’ve 
got to say, w — would it?” 

“Miss Granger, you are already facing suspension 
from this school,” Snape spat. “You, Potter, and 
Weasley are out-of-bounds, in the company of a 
convicted murderer and a werewolf. For once in your 
life, hold your tongue.” 

“But if — if there was a mistake — ” 

“KEEP QUIET, YOU STUPID GIRL!” Snape shouted, 
looking suddenly quite deranged. “DONT TALK 
ABOUT WHAT YOU DONT UNDERSTAND!” A few 
sparks shot out of the end of his wand, which was 
still pointed at Black’s face. Hermione fell silent. 

“Vengeance is very sweet,” Snape breathed at Black. 
“How I hoped I would be the one to catch you. ...” 

“The joke’s on you again, Severus,” Black snarled. “As 
long as this boy brings his rat up to the castle” — he 
jerked his head at Ron — “I’ll come quietly. ...” 

“Up to the castle?” said Snape silkily. “I don’t think 
we need to go that far. All I have to do is call the 
dementors once we get out of the Willow. They’ll be 
very pleased to see you, Black ... pleased enough to 
give you a little kiss, I daresay. ...” 

What little color there was in Black’s face left it. 

“You — you’ve got to hear me out,” he croaked. “The 
rat — look at the rat — ” 

But there was a mad glint in Snape ’s eyes that Harry 
had never seen before. He seemed beyond reason. 



Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, all of you,” he said. He clicked his fingers, 
and the ends of the cords that bound Lupin flew to 
his hands. “Ill drag the werewolf. Perhaps the 
dementors will have a kiss for him too — ” 

Before he knew what he was doing, Harry had crossed 
the room in three strides and blocked the door. 

“Get out of the way, Potter, you’re in enough trouble 
already,” snarled Snape. “If I hadn’t been here to save 
your skin — ” 

“Professor Lupin could have killed me about a 
hundred times this year,” Harry said. “I’ve been alone 
with him loads of times, having defense lessons 
against the dementors. If he was helping Black, why 
didn’t he just finish me off then?” 

“Don’t ask me to fathom the way a werewolf’s mind 
works,” hissed Snape. “Get out of the way, Potter.” 

“YOU’RE PATHETIC!” Harry yelled. “JUST BECAUSE 
THEY MADE A FOOL OF YOU AT SCHOOL YOU 
WONT EVEN LISTEN — ” 

“SILENCE! I WILL NOT BE SPOKEN TO LIKE THAT!” 
Snape shrieked, looking madder than ever. “Like 
father, like son, Potter! I have just saved your neck; 
you should be thanking me on bended knee! You 
would have been well served if he’d killed you! You’d 
have died like your father, too arrogant to believe you 
might be mistaken in Black — now get out of the way, 
or I will make you. GET OUT OF THE WAY, POTTER!” 

Harry made up his mind in a split second. Before 
Snape could take even one step toward him, he had 
raised his wand. 



Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ Expelliarmus\” he yelled — except that his wasn’t the 
only voice that shouted. There was a blast that made 
the door rattle on its hinges; Snape was lifted off his 
feet and slammed into the wall, then slid down it to 
the floor, a trickle of blood oozing from under his hair. 
He had been knocked out. 

Harry looked around. Both Ron and Hermione had 
tried to disarm Snape at exactly the same moment. 
Snape ’s wand soared in a high arc and landed on the 
bed next to Crookshanks. 

“You shouldn’t have done that,” said Black, looking at 
Harry. “You should have left him to me. ...” 

Harry avoided Black’s eyes. He wasn’t sure, even now, 
that he’d done the right thing. 

“We attacked a teacher. ... We attacked a teacher ... ,” 
Hermione whimpered, staring at the lifeless Snape 
with frightened eyes. “Oh, we’re going to be in so 
much trouble — ” 

Lupin was struggling against his bonds. Black bent 
down quickly and untied him. Lupin straightened up, 
rubbing his arms where the ropes had cut into them. 

“Thank you, Harry,” he said. 

“I’m still not saying I believe you,” he told Lupin. 

“Then it’s time we offered you some proof,” said 
Lupin. “You, boy — give me Peter, please. Now.” 

Ron clutched Scabbers closer to his chest. 

“Come off it,” he said weakly. “Are you trying to say 
he broke out of Azkaban just to get his hands on 
Scabbers ? I mean ...” He looked up at Harry and 

Page | 404 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione for support, “Okay, say Pettigrew could 
turn into a rat — there are millions of rats — how’s he 
supposed to know which one he’s after if he was 
locked up in Azkaban?” 

“You know, Sirius, that’s a fair question,” said Lupin, 
turning to Black and frowning slightly. “How did you 
find out where he was?” 

Black put one of his clawlike hands inside his robes 
and took out a crumpled piece of paper, which he 
smoothed flat and held out to show the others. 

It was the photograph of Ron and his family that had 
appeared in the Daily Prophet the previous summer, 
and there, on Ron’s shoulder, was Scabbers. 

“How did you get this?” Lupin asked Black, 
thunderstruck. 

“Fudge,” said Black. “When he came to inspect 
Azkaban last year, he gave me his paper. And there 
was Peter, on the front page ... on this boy’s shoulder. 
... I knew him at once . . . how many times had I seen 
him transform? And the caption said the boy would 
be going back to Hogwarts ... to where Harry was. ...” 

“My God,” said Lupin softly, staring from Scabbers to 
the picture in the paper and back again. “His front 
paw ...” 

“What about it?” said Ron defiantly. 

“He’s got a toe missing,” said Black. 

“Of course,” Lupin breathed. “So simple ... so brilliant 
... he cut it off himself?” 



Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Just before he transformed,” said Black. “When I 
cornered him, he yelled for the whole street to hear 
that I’d betrayed Lily and James. Then, before I could 
curse him, he blew apart the street with the wand 
behind his back, killed everyone within twenty feet of 
himself — and sped down into the sewer with the 
other rats. ...” 

“Didn’t you ever hear, Ron?” said Lupin. “The biggest 
bit of Peter they found was his finger.” 

“Look, Scabbers probably had a fight with another rat 
or something! He’s been in my family for ages, right — 



“Twelve years, in fact,” said Lupin. “Didn’t you ever 
wonder why he was living so long?” 

“We — we’ve been taking good care of him!” said Ron. 

“Not looking too good at the moment, though, is he?” 
said Lupin. “I’d guess he’s been losing weight ever 
since he heard Sirius was on the loose again. ...” 

“He’s been scared of that mad cat!” said Ron, nodding 
toward Crookshanks, who was still purring on the 
bed. 

But that wasn’t right, Harry thought suddenly. ... 
Scabbers had been looking ill before he met 
Crookshanks . . . ever since Ron’s return from Egypt . . . 
since the time when Black had escaped. ... 

“This cat isn’t mad,” said Black hoarsely. He reached 
out a bony hand and stroked Crookshanks ’s fluffy 
head. “He’s the most intelligent of his kind I’ve ever 
met. He recognized Peter for what he was right away. 
And when he met me, he knew I was no dog. It was a 
while before he trusted me. ... Finally, I managed to 
Page | 406 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




communicate to him what I was after, and he’s been 
helping me. ...” 



“What do you mean?” breathed Hermione. 

“He tried to bring Peter to me, but couldn’t ... so he 
stole the passwords into Gryffindor Tower for me. ... 

As I understand it, he took them from a boy’s bedside 
table. ...” 

Harry’s brain seemed to be sagging under the weight 
of what he was hearing. It was absurd . . . and yet . . . 

“But Peter got wind of what was going on and ran for 
it. ...” croaked Black. “This cat — Crookshanks, did 
you call him? — told me Peter had left blood on the 
sheets. ... I supposed he bit himself. ... Well, faking 
his own death had worked once. ...” 

These words jolted Harry to his senses. 

“And why did he fake his death?” he said furiously. 
“Because he knew you were about to kill him like you 
killed my parents!” 

“No,” said Lupin, “Harry — ” 

“And now you’ve come to finish him off!” 

“Yes, I have,” said Black, with an evil look at 
Scabbers. 

“Then I should’ve let Snape take you!” Harry shouted. 

“Harry,” said Lupin hurriedly, “don’t you see? All this 
time we’ve thought Sirius betrayed your parents, and 
Peter tracked him down — but it was the other way 
around, don’t you see? Peter betrayed your mother 
and father — Sirius tracked Peter down — ” 

Page | 407 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“THAT’S NOT TRUE!” Harry yelled. “HE WAS THEIR 
SECRET-KEEPER! HE SAID SO BEFORE YOU 
TURNED UP. HE SAID HE KILLED THEM!” 

He was pointing at Black, who shook his head slowly; 
the sunken eyes were suddenly overbright. 

“Harry ... I as good as killed them,” he croaked. “I 
persuaded Lily and James to change to Peter at the 
last moment, persuaded them to use him as Secret- 
Keeper instead of me. ... I’m to blame, I know it. ... 
The night they died, I’d arranged to check on Peter, 
make sure he was still safe, but when I arrived at his 
hiding place, he’d gone. Yet there was no sign of a 
struggle. It didn’t feel right. I was scared. I set out for 
your parents’ house straight away. And when I saw 
their house, destroyed, and their bodies ... I realized 
what Peter must’ve done ... what I’d done. ...” 

His voice broke. He turned away. 

“Enough of this,” said Lupin, and there was a steely 
note in his voice Harry had never heard before. 
“There’s one certain way to prove what really 
happened. Ron, give me that rat” 

“What are you going to do with him if I give him to 
you?” Ron asked Lupin tensely. 

“Force him to show himself,” said Lupin. “If he really 
is a rat, it won’t hurt him.” 

Ron hesitated. Then at long last, he held out 
Scabbers and Lupin took him. Scabbers began to 
squeak without stopping, twisting and turning, his 
tiny black eyes bulging in his head. 

“Ready, Sirius?” said Lupin. 



Page | 408 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black had already retrieved Snape’s wand from the 
bed. He approached Lupin and the struggling rat, and 
his wet eyes suddenly seemed to be burning in his 
face. 

“Together?” he said quietly. 

“I think so,” said Lupin, holding Scabbers tightly in 
one hand and his wand in the other. “On the count of 
three. One — two — THREE!” 

A flash of blue-white light erupted from both wands; 
for a moment, Scabbers was frozen in midair, his 
small gray form twisting madly — Ron yelled — the 
rat fell and hit the floor. There was another blinding 
flash of light and then — 

It was like watching a speeded-up film of a growing 
tree. A head was shooting upward from the ground; 
limbs were sprouting; a moment later, a man was 
standing where Scabbers had been, cringing and 
wringing his hands. Crookshanks was spitting and 
snarling on the bed; the hair on his back was 
standing up. 

He was a very short man, hardly taller than Harry 
and Hermione. His thin, colorless hair was unkempt 
and there was a large bald patch on top. He had the 
shrunken appearance of a plump man who has lost a 
lot of weight in a short time. His skin looked grubby, 
almost like Scabbers ’s fur, and something of the rat 
lingered around his pointed nose and his very small, 
watery eyes. He looked around at them all, his 
breathing fast and shallow. Harry saw his eyes dart to 
the door and back again. 

“Well, hello, Peter,” said Lupin pleasantly, as though 
rats frequently erupted into old school friends around 
him. “Long time, no see.” 

Page | 409 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“S — Sirius ... R — Remus ...” Even Pettigrew’s voice 
was squeaky. Again, his eyes darted toward the door. 
“My friends ... my old friends ...” 

Black’s wand arm rose, but Lupin seized him around 
the wrist, gave him a warning look, then turned again 
to Pettigrew, his voice light and casual. 

“We’ve been having a little chat, Peter, about what 
happened the night Lily and James died. You might 
have missed the finer points while you were 
squeaking around down there on the bed — ” 

“Remus,” gasped Pettigrew, and Harry could see 
beads of sweat breaking out over his pasty face, “you 
don’t believe him, do you... ? He tried to kill me, 
Remus. ...” 

“So we’ve heard,” said Lupin, more coldly. “I’d like to 
clear up one or two little matters with you, Peter, if 
you’d be so — ” 

“He’s come to try and kill me again!” Pettigrew 
squeaked suddenly, pointing at Black, and Harry saw 
that he used his middle finger, because his index was 
missing. “He killed Lily and James and now he’s going 
to kill me too. ... You’ve got to help me, Remus. ...” 

Black’s face looked more skull-like than ever as he 
stared at Pettigrew with his fathomless eyes. 

“No one’s going to try and kill you until we’ve sorted a 
few things out,” said Lupin. 

“Sorted things out?” squealed Pettigrew, looking 
wildly about him once more, eyes taking in the 
boarded windows and, again, the only door. “I knew 
he’d come after me! I knew he’d be back for me! I’ve 
been waiting for this for twelve years!” 

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You knew Sirius was going to break out of Azkaban?” 
said Lupin, his brow furrowed. “When nobody has 
ever done it before?” 

“He’s got dark powers the rest of us can only dream 
of!” Pettigrew shouted shrilly. “How else did he get out 
of there? I suppose He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named 
taught him a few tricks!” 

Black started to laugh, a horrible, mirthless laugh 
that filled the whole room. 

“Voldemort, teach me tricks?” he said. 

Pettigrew flinched as though Black had brandished a 
whip at him. 

“What, scared to hear your old master’s name?” said 
Black. “I don’t blame you, Peter. His lot aren’t very 
happy with you, are they?” 

“Don’t know what you mean, Sirius — ” muttered 
Pettigrew, his breathing faster than ever. His whole 
face was shining with sweat now. 

“You haven’t been hiding from me for twelve years,” 
said Black. “You’ve been hiding from Voldemort’s old 
supporters. I heard things in Azkaban, Peter. ... They 
all think you’re dead, or you’d have to answer to 
them. ... I’ve heard them screaming all sorts of things 
in their sleep. Sounds like they think the double- 
crosser double-crossed them. Voldemort went to the 
Potters’ on your information ... and Voldemort met his 
downfall there. And not all Voldemort’s supporters 
ended up in Azkaban, did they? There are still plenty 
out here, biding their time, pretending they’ve seen 
the error of their ways. ... If they ever got wind that 
you were still alive, Peter — ” 



Page | 411 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t know ... what you’re talking about... said 
Pettigrew again, more shrilly than ever. He wiped his 
face on his sleeve and looked up at Lupin. “You don’t 
believe this — this madness, Remus — ” 

“I must admit, Peter, I have difficulty in 
understanding why an innocent man would want to 
spend twelve years as a rat,” said Lupin evenly. 

“Innocent, but scared!” squealed Pettigrew. “If 
Voldemort’s supporters were after me, it was because 
I put one of their best men in Azkaban — the spy, 
Sirius Black!” 

Black’s face contorted. 

“How dare you,” he growled, sounding suddenly like 
the bear-sized dog he had been. “I, a spy for 
Voldemort? When did I ever sneak around people who 
were stronger and more powerful than myself? But 
you, Peter — I’ll never understand why I didn’t see 
you were the spy from the start. You always liked big 
friends who’d look after you, didn’t you? It used to be 
us ... me and Remus ... and James. ...” 

Pettigrew wiped his face again; he was almost panting 
for breath. 

“Me, a spy ... must be out of your mind ... never ... 
don’t know how you can say such a — ” 

“Lily and James only made you Secret-Keeper 
because I suggested it,” Black hissed, so venomously 
that Pettigrew took a step backward. “I thought it was 
the perfect plan ... a bluff. ... Voldemort would be 
sure to come after me, would never dream they’d use 
a weak, talentless thing like you. ... It must have been 
the finest moment of your miserable life, telling 
Voldemort you could hand him the Potters.” 

Page | 412 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Pettigrew was muttering distractedly; Harry caught 
words like “far-fetched” and “lunacy,” but he couldn’t 
help paying more attention to the ashen color of 
Pettigrew’s face and the way his eyes continued to 
dart toward the windows and door. 

“Professor Lupin?” said Hermione timidly. “Can — can 
I say something?” 

“Certainly, Hermione,” said Lupin courteously. 

“Well — Scabbers — I mean, this — this man — he’s 
been sleeping in Harry’s dormitory for three years. If 
he’s working for You-Know-Who, how come he never 
tried to hurt Harry before now?” 

“There!” said Pettigrew shrilly, pointing at Ron with 
his maimed hand. “Thank you! You see, Remus? I 
have never hurt a hair of Harry’s head! Why should 
I?” 

“I’ll tell you why,” said Black. “Because you never did 
anything for anyone unless you could see what was in 
it for you. Voldemort’s been in hiding for fifteen years, 
they say he’s half dead. You weren’t about to commit 
murder right under Albus Dumbledore’s nose, for a 
wreck of a wizard who’d lost all of his power, were 
you? You’d want to be quite sure he was the biggest 
bully in the playground before you went back to him, 
wouldn’t you? Why else did you find a wizard family 
to take you in? Keeping an ear out for news, weren’t 
you, Peter? Just in case your old protector regained 
strength, and it was safe to rejoin him. ...” 

Pettigrew opened his mouth and closed it several 
times. He seemed to have lost the ability to talk. 

“Er — Mr. Black — Sirius?” said Hermione. 



Page | 413 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black jumped at being addressed like this and stared 
at Hermione as though he had never seen anything 
quite like her. 

“If you don’t mind me asking, how — how did you get 
out of Azkaban, if you didn’t use Dark Magic?” 

“Thank you!” gasped Pettigrew, nodding frantically at 
her. “Exactly! Precisely what I — ” 

But Lupin silenced him with a look. Black was 
frowning slightly at Hermione, but not as though he 
were annoyed with her. He seemed to be pondering 
his answer. 

“I don’t know how I did it,” he said slowly. “I think the 
only reason I never lost my mind is that I knew I was 
innocent. That wasn’t a happy thought, so the 
dementors couldn’t suck it out of me ... but it kept me 
sane and knowing who I am . . . helped me keep my 
powers ... so when it all became . . . too much ... I 
could transform in my cell . . . become a dog. 
Dementors can’t see, you know. ...” He swallowed. 
“They feel their way toward people by feeding off their 
emotions. ... They could tell that my feelings were less 
— less human, less complex when I was a dog ... but 
they thought, of course, that I was losing my mind 
like everyone else in there, so it didn’t trouble them. 
But I was weak, very weak, and I had no hope of 
driving them away from me without a wand. ... 

“But then I saw Peter in that picture ... I realized he 
was at Hogwarts with Harry . . . perfectly positioned to 
act, if one hint reached his ears that the Dark Side 
was gathering strength again. ...” 

Pettigrew was shaking his head, mouthing 
noiselessly, but staring all the while at Black as 
though hypnotized. 

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




"... ready to strike at the moment he could be sure of 
allies ... and to deliver the last Potter to them. If he 
gave them Harry, who’d dare say he’d betrayed Lord 
Voldemort? He’d be welcomed back with honors. ... 

“So you see, I had to do something. I was the only one 
who knew Peter was still alive. ...” 

Harry remembered what Mr. Weasley had told Mrs. 
Weasley. “The guards say he’s been talking in his 
sleep ... always the same words ... ‘He’s at Hog warts.’ 



“It was as if someone had lit a fire in my head, and 
the dementors couldn’t destroy it. ... It wasn’t a 
happy feeling ... it was an obsession . . . but it gave me 
strength, it cleared my mind. So, one night when they 
opened my door to bring food, I slipped past them as 
a dog. ... It’s so much harder for them to sense 
animal emotions that they were confused. ... I was 
thin, very thin . . . thin enough to slip through the 
bars. ... I swam as a dog back to the mainland. ... I 
journeyed north and slipped into the Hogwarts 
grounds as a dog. I’ve been living in the forest ever 
since, except when I came to watch the Quidditch, of 
course. You fly as well as your father did, Harry. ...” 

He looked at Harry, who did not look away. 

“Believe me,” croaked Black. “Believe me, Harry. I 
never betrayed James and Lily. I would have died 
before I betrayed them.” 

And at long last, Harry believed him. Throat too tight 
to speak, he nodded. 

“No!” 



Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Pettigrew had fallen to his knees as though Harry’s 
nod had been his own death sentence. He shuffled 
forward on his knees, groveling, his hands clasped in 
front of him as though praying. 

“Sirius — it’s me ... it’s Peter ... your friend ... you 
wouldn’t ...” 

Black kicked out and Pettigrew recoiled. 

“There’s enough filth on my robes without you 
touching them,” said Black. 

“Remus!” Pettigrew squeaked, turning to Lupin 
instead, writhing imploringly in front of him. “You 
don’t believe this ... wouldn’t Sirius have told you 
they’d changed the plan?” 

“Not if he thought I was the spy, Peter,” said Lupin. “I 
assume that’s why you didn’t tell me, Sirius?” he said 
casually over Pettigrew’s head. 

“Forgive me, Remus,” said Black. 

“Not at all, Padfoot, old friend,” said Lupin, who was 
now rolling up his sleeves. “And will you, in turn, 
forgive me for believing you were the spy?” 

“Of course,” said Black, and the ghost of a grin flitted 
across his gaunt face. He, too, began rolling up his 
sleeves. “Shall we kill him together?” 

“Yes, I think so,” said Lupin grimly. 

“You wouldn’t ... you won’t... ,” gasped Pettigrew. And 
he scrambled around to Ron. 



Page | 416 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron ... haven’t I been a good friend ... a good pet? 

You won’t let them kill me, Ron, will you ... you’re on 
my side, aren’t you?” 

But Ron was staring at Pettigrew with the utmost 
revulsion. 

“I let you sleep in my bed\” he said. 

“Kind boy ... kind master ...” Pettigrew crawled toward 
Ron, “you won’t let them do it. ... I was your rat. ... I 
was a good pet. ...” 

“If you made a better rat than a human, it’s not much 
to boast about, Peter,” said Black harshly. Ron, going 
still paler with pain, wrenched his broken leg out of 
Pettigrew’s reach. Pettigrew turned on his knees, 
staggered forward, and seized the hem of Hermione’s 
robes. 

“Sweet girl ... clever girl ... you — you won’t let them. 
... Help me. ...” 

Hermione pulled her robes out of Pettigrew’s 
clutching hands and backed away against the wall, 
looking horrified. 

Pettigrew knelt, trembling uncontrollably, and turned 
his head slowly toward Harry. 

“Harry ... Harry ... you look just like your father ... 
just like him. ...” 

“HOW DARE YOU SPEAK TO HARRY?” roared Black. 
“HOW DARE YOU FACE HIM? HOW DARE YOU TALK 
ABOUT JAMES IN FRONT OF HIM?” 

“Harry,” whispered Pettigrew, shuffling toward him, 
hands outstretched. “Harry, James wouldn’t have 

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




wanted me killed. ... James would have understood, 
Harry ... he would have shown me mercy. ...” 



Both Black and Lupin strode forward, seized 
Pettigrew’s shoulders, and threw him backward onto 
the floor. He sat there, twitching with terror, staring 
up at them. 

“You sold Lily and James to Voldemort,” said Black, 
who was shaking too. “Do you deny it?” 

Pettigrew burst into tears. It was horrible to watch, 
like an oversized, balding baby, cowering on the floor. 

“Sirius, Sirius, what could I have done? The Dark 
Lord . . . you have no idea ... he has weapons you can’t 
imagine. ... I was scared, Sirius, I was never brave 
like you and Remus and James. I never meant it to 
happen. ... He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named forced me — 



“DONT LIE!” bellowed Black. “YOU’D BEEN PASSING 
INFORMATION TO HIM FOR A YEAR BEFORE LILY 
AND JAMES DIED! YOU WERE HIS SPY!” 

“He — he was taking over everywhere!” gasped 
Pettigrew. “Wh — what was there to be gained by 
refusing him?” 

“What was there to be gained by fighting the most evil 
wizard who has ever existed?” said Black, with a 
terribly fury in his face. “Only innocent lives, Peter!” 

“You don’t understand!” whined Pettigrew. “He would 
have killed me, Sirius!” 

“THEN YOU SHOULD HAVE DIED!” roared Black. 
“DIED RATHER THAN BETRAY YOUR FRIENDS, AS 
WE WOULD HAVE DONE FOR YOU!” 

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black and Lupin stood shoulder to shoulder, wands 
raised. 

“You should have realized,” said Lupin quietly, “if 
Voldemort didn’t kill you, we would. Good-bye, Peter.” 

Hermione covered her face with her hands and turned 
to the wall. 

“NO!” Harry yelled. He ran forward, placing himself in 
front of Pettigrew, facing the wands. “You can’t kill 
him,” he said breathlessly. “You can’t.” 

Black and Lupin both looked staggered. 

“Harry, this piece of vermin is the reason you have no 
parents,” Black snarled. “This cringing bit of filth 
would have seen you die too, without turning a hair. 
You heard him. His own stinking skin meant more to 
him than your whole family.” 

“I know,” Harry panted. “We’ll take him up to the 
castle. We’ll hand him over to the dementors. ... He 
can go to Azkaban ... but don’t kill him.” 

“Harry!” gasped Pettigrew, and he flung his arms 
around Harry’s knees. “You — thank you — it’s more 
than I deserve — thank you — ” 

“Get off me,” Harry spat, throwing Pettigrew’s hands 
off him in disgust. “I’m not doing this for you. I’m 
doing it because — I don’t reckon my dad would’ve 
wanted them to become killers — just for you.” 

No one moved or made a sound except Pettigrew, 
whose breath was coming in wheezes as he clutched 
his chest. Black and Lupin were looking at each 
other. Then, with one movement, they lowered their 
wands. 

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re the only person who has the right to decide, 
Harry,” said Black. “But think ... think what he did. 



“He can go to Azkaban,” Harry repeated. “If anyone 
deserves that place, he does. ...” 

Pettigrew was still wheezing behind him. 

“Very well,” said Lupin. “Stand aside, Harry.” 

Harry hesitated. 

“I’m going to tie him up,” said Lupin. “That’s all, I 
swear.” 

Harry stepped out of the way. Thin cords shot from 
Lupin’s wand this time, and next moment, Pettigrew 
was wriggling on the floor, bound and gagged. 

“But if you transform, Peter,” growled Black, his own 
wand pointing at Pettigrew too, “we will kill you. You 
agree, Harry?” 

Harry looked down at the pitiful figure on the floor 
and nodded so that Pettigrew could see him. 

“Right,” said Lupin, suddenly businesslike. “Ron, I 
can’t mend bones nearly as well as Madam Pomfrey, 
so I think it’s best if we just strap your leg up until we 
can get you to the hospital wing.” 

He hurried over to Ron, bent down, tapped Ron’s leg 
with his wand, and muttered, “Ferula.” Bandages 
spun up Ron’s leg, strapping it tightly to a splint. 
Lupin helped him to his feet; Ron put his weight 
gingerly on the leg and didn’t wince. 

“That’s better,” he said. “Thanks.” 

Page | 420 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What about Professor Snape?” said Hermione in a 
small voice, looking down at Snape’s prone figure. 



“There’s nothing seriously wrong with him,” said 
Lupin, bending over Snape and checking his pulse. 
“You were just a little — overenthusiastic. Still out 
cold. Er — perhaps it will be best if we don’t revive 
him until we’re safely back in the castle. We can take 
him like this. ...” 

He muttered, “Mobilicorpus.” As though invisible 
strings were tied to Snape’s wrists, neck, and knees, 
he was pulled into a standing position, head still 
lolling unpleasantly, like a grotesque puppet. He hung 
a few inches above the ground, his limp feet dangling. 
Lupin picked up the Invisibility Cloak and tucked it 
safely into his pocket. 

“And two of us should be chained to this,” said Black, 
nudging Pettigrew with his toe. “Just to make sure.” 

“I’ll do it,” said Lupin. 

“And me,” said Ron savagely, limping forward. 

Black conjured heavy manacles from thin air; soon 
Pettigrew was upright again, left arm chained to 
Lupin’s right, right arm to Ron’s left. Ron’s face was 
set. He seemed to have taken Scabbers’s true identity 
as a personal insult. Crookshanks leapt lightly off the 
bed and led the way out of the room, his bottlebrush 
tail held jauntily high. 



Page | 421 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE DEMENTOR’S KISS 

Harry had never been part of a stranger group. 
Crookshanks led the way down the stairs; Lupin, 
Pettigrew, and Ron went next, looking like entrants in 
a six-legged race. Next came Professor Snape, drifting 
creepily along, his toes hitting each stair as they 
descended, held up by his own wand, which was 
being pointed at him by Sirius. Harry and Hermione 
brought up the rear. 

Getting back into the tunnel was difficult. Lupin, 
Pettigrew, and Ron had to turn sideways to manage 
it; Lupin still had Pettigrew covered with his wand. 
Harry could see them edging awkwardly along the 
tunnel in single file. Crookshanks was still in the 
lead. Harry went right after Black, who was still 
making Snape drift along ahead of them; he kept 
bumping his lolling head on the low ceiling. Harry 
had the impression Black was making no effort to 
prevent this. 



Page | 422 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“You know what this means?” Black said abruptly to 
Harry as they made their slow progress along the 
tunnel. “Turning Pettigrew in?” 

“You’re free,” said Harry. 

“Yes ... ,” said Black. “But I’m also — I don’t know if 
anyone ever told you — I’m your godfather.” 

“Yeah, I knew that,” said Harry. 

“Well ... your parents appointed me your guardian,” 
said Black stiffly. “If anything happened to them ...” 

Harry waited. Did Black mean what he thought he 
meant? 

“I’ll understand, of course, if you want to stay with 
your aunt and uncle,” said Black. “But ... well ... 
think about it. Once my name’s cleared ... if you 
wanted a ... a different home ...” 

Some sort of explosion took place in the pit of Harry’s 
stomach. 

“What — live with you?” he said, accidentally cracking 
his head on a bit of rock protruding from the ceiling. 
“Leave the Dursleys?” 

“Of course, I thought you wouldn’t want to,” said 
Black quickly. “I understand, I just thought I’d — ” 

“Are you insane?” said Harry, his voice easily as 
croaky as Black’s. “Of course I want to leave the 
Dursleys! Have you got a house? When can I move 
in?” 



Page | 423 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black turned right around to look at him; Snape’s 
head was scraping the ceiling but Black didn’t seem 
to care. 

“You want to?” he said. “You mean it?” 

“Yeah, I mean it!” said Harry. 

Black’s gaunt face broke into the first true smile 
Harry had seen upon it. The difference it made was 
startling, as though a person ten years younger were 
shining through the starved mask; for a moment, he 
was recognizable as the man who had laughed at 
Harry’s parents’ wedding. 

They did not speak again until they had reached the 
end of the tunnel. Crookshanks darted up first; he 
had evidently pressed his paw to the knot on the 
trunk, because Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron clambered 
upward without any sound of savaging branches. 

Black saw Snape up through the hole, then stood 
back for Harry and Hermione to pass. At last, all of 
them were out. 

The grounds were very dark now; the only light came 
from the distant windows of the castle. Without a 
word, they set off. Pettigrew was still wheezing and 
occasionally whimpering. Harry’s mind was buzzing. 
He was going to leave the Dursleys. He was going to 
live with Sirius Black, his parents’ best friend. ... He 
felt dazed. ... What would happen when he told the 
Dursleys he was going to live with the convict they’d 
seen on television... ! 

“One wrong move, Peter,” said Lupin threateningly 
ahead. His wand was still pointed sideways at 
Pettigrew’s chest. 



Page | 424 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Silently they tramped through the grounds, the castle 
lights growing slowly larger. Snape was still drifting 
weirdly ahead of Black, his chin bumping on his 
chest. And then — 

A cloud shifted. There were suddenly dim shadows on 
the ground. Their party was bathed in moonlight. 

Snape collided with Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron, who 
had stopped abruptly. Black froze. He flung out one 
arm to make Harry and Hermione stop. 

Harry could see Lupin’s silhouette. He had gone rigid. 
Then his limbs began to shake. 

“Oh, my — ” Hermione gasped. “He didn’t take his 
potion tonight! He’s not safe!” 

“Run,” Black whispered. “Run. Now.” 

But Harry couldn’t run. Ron was chained to Pettigrew 
and Lupin. He leapt forward but Black caught him 
around the chest and threw him back. 

“Leave it to me — RUN!” 

There was a terrible snarling noise. Lupin’s head was 
lengthening. So was his body. His shoulders were 
hunching. Hair was sprouting visibly on his face and 
hands, which were curling into clawed paws. 
Crookshanks’s hair was on end again; he was backing 
away — 

As the werewolf reared, snapping its long jaws, Sirius 
disappeared from Harry’s side. He had transformed. 
The enormous, bearlike dog bounded forward. As the 
werewolf wrenched itself free of the manacle binding 
it, the dog seized it about the neck and pulled it 



Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




backward, away from Ron and Pettigrew. They were 
locked, jaw to jaw, claws ripping at each other — 

Harry stood, transfixed by the sight, too intent upon 
the battle to notice anything else. It was Hermione’s 
scream that alerted him — 

Pettigrew had dived for Lupin’s dropped wand. Ron, 
unsteady on his bandaged leg, fell. There was a bang, 
a burst of light — and Ron lay motionless on the 
ground. Another bang — Crookshanks flew into the 
air and back to the earth in a heap. 

“ ExpelliarmusV’ Harry yelled, pointing his own wand 
at Pettigrew; Lupin’s wand flew high into the air and 
out of sight. “Stay where you are!” Harry shouted, 
running forward. 

Too late. Pettigrew had transformed. Harry saw his 
bald tail whip through the manacle on Ron’s 
outstretched arm and heard a scurrying through the 
grass. 

There was a howl and a rumbling growl; Harry turned 
to see the werewolf taking flight; it was galloping into 
the forest — 

“Sirius, he’s gone, Pettigrew transformed!” Harry 
yelled. 

Black was bleeding; there were gashes across his 
muzzle and back, but at Harry’s words he scrambled 
up again, and in an instant, the sound of his paws 
faded to silence as he pounded away across the 
grounds. 

Harry and Hermione dashed over to Ron. 



Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What did he do to him?” Hermione whispered. Ron’s 
eyes were only half-closed, his mouth hung open; he 
was definitely alive, they could hear him breathing, 
but he didn’t seem to recognize them. 

“I don’t know. ...” 

Harry looked desperately around. Black and Lupin 
both gone . . . they had no one but Snape for company, 
still hanging, unconscious, in midair. 

“We’d better get them up to the castle and tell 
someone,” said Harry, pushing his hair out of his 
eyes, trying to think straight. Come — ” 

But then, from beyond the range of their vision, they 
heard a yelping, a whining: a dog in pain. ... 

“Sirius,” Harry muttered, staring into the darkness. 

He had a moment’s indecision, but there was nothing 
they could do for Ron at the moment, and by the 
sound of it, Black was in trouble — 

Harry set off at a run, Hermione right behind him. 

The yelping seemed to be coming from the ground 
near the edge of the lake. They pelted toward it, and 
Harry, running flat out, felt the cold without realizing 
what it must mean — 

The yelping stopped abruptly. As they reached the 
lakeshore, they saw why — Sirius had turned back 
into a man. He was crouched on all fours, his hands 
over his head. 

“iVooo,” he moaned. “Noooo ... please. ...” 

And then Harry saw them. Dementors, at least a 
hundred of them, gliding in a black mass around the 

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




lake toward them. He spun around, the familiar, icy 
cold penetrating his insides, fog starting to obscure 
his vision; more were appearing out of the darkness 
on every side; they were encircling them. ... 

“Hermione, think of something happy!” Harry yelled, 
raising his wand, blinking furiously to try and clear 
his vision, shaking his head to rid it of the faint 
screaming that had started inside it — 

I’m going to live with my godfather. I’m leaving the 
Dursleys. 

He forced himself to think of Black, and only Black, 
and began to chant: “Expecto patronum). Expecto 
patronum).” 

Black gave a shudder, rolled over, and lay motionless 
on the ground, pale as death. 

Hell be all right. I’m going to go and live with him. 

“Expecto patronum). Hermione, help me! Expecto 
patronum).” 

“Expecto — ” Hermione whispered, “expecto — expecto 



But she couldn’t do it. The dementors were closing in, 
barely ten feet from them. They formed a solid wall 
around Harry and Hermione, and were getting closer. 



“EXPECTO PATRONUM” Harry yelled, trying to blot 
the screaming from his ears. “EXPECTO PATRONUM.” 

A thin wisp of silver escaped his wand and hovered 
like mist before him. At the same moment, Harry felt 



Page | 428 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione collapse next to him. He was alone ... 
completely alone. ... 

“Expecto — expecto patronum — ” 

Harry felt his knees hit the cold grass. Fog was 
clouding his eyes. With a huge effort, he fought to 
remember — Sirius was innocent — innocent — We’ll 
be okay — I’m going to live with him — 

“ Expecto patronum J” he gasped. 

By the feeble light of his formless Patronus, he saw a 
dementor halt, very close to him. It couldn’t walk 
through the cloud of silver mist Harry had conjured. 

A dead, slimy hand slid out from under the cloak. It 
made a gesture as though to sweep the Patronus 
aside. 

“No — no — ” Harry gasped. “He’s innocent ... expecto 
— expecto patronum — ” 

He could feel them watching him, hear their rattling 
breath like an evil wind around him. The nearest 
dementor seemed to be considering him. Then it 
raised both its rotting hands — and lowered its hood. 

Where there should have been eyes, there was only 
thin, gray scabbed skin, stretched blankly over empty 
sockets. But there was a mouth ... a gaping, 
shapeless hole, sucking the air with the sound of a 
death rattle. 

A paralyzing terror filled Harry so that he couldn’t 
move or speak. His Patronus flickered and died. 

White fog was blinding him. He had to fight ... expecto 
patronum ... he couldn’t see ... and in the distance, he 
heard the familiar screaming . . . expecto patronum . . . 

Page | 429 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




he groped in the mist for Sirius, and found his arm ... 
they weren’t going to take him. ... 

But a pair of strong, clammy hands suddenly 
attached themselves around Harry’s neck. They were 
forcing his face upward. ... He could feel its breath. ... 
It was going to get rid of him first. ... He could feel its 
putrid breath. . . . His mother was screaming in his 
ears. ... She was going to be the last thing he ever 
heard — 

And then, through the fog that was drowning him, he 
thought he saw a silvery light growing brighter and 
brighter. ... He felt himself fall forward onto the grass. 
... Facedown, too weak to move, sick and shaking, 
Harry opened his eyes. The dementor must have 
released him. The blinding light was illuminating the 
grass around him. ... The screaming had stopped, the 
cold was ebbing away. . . . 

Something was driving the dementors back. ... It was 
circling around him and Black and Hermione. ... They 
were leaving. ... The air was warm again. ... 

With every ounce of strength he could muster, Harry 
raised his head a few inches and saw an animal amid 
the light, galloping away across the lake. ... Eyes 
blurred with sweat, Harry tried to make out what it 
was. ... It was as bright as a unicorn. ... Fighting to 
stay conscious, Harry watched it canter to a halt as it 
reached the opposite shore. For a moment, Harry 
saw, by its brightness, somebody welcoming it back 
. . . raising his hand to pat it . . . someone who looked 
strangely familiar ... but it couldn’t be ... 

Harry didn’t understand. He couldn’t think anymore. 
He felt the last of his strength leave him, and his head 
hit the ground as he fainted. 



Page | 430 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





HERMIONE’S SECRET 

“Shocking business ... shocking ... miracle none of 
them died . . . never heard the like ... by thunder, it 
was lucky you were there, Snape. ...” 

“Thank you, Minister.” 

“Order of Merlin, Second Class, I’d say. First Class, if 
I can wangle it!” 

“Thank you very much indeed, Minister.” 

“Nasty cut you’ve got there. ... Black’s work, I 
suppose?” 

“As a matter of fact, it was Potter, Weasley, and 
Granger, Minister. ...” 

“iVo!” 

“Black had bewitched them, I saw it immediately. A 
Confundus Charm, to judge by their behavior. They 
seemed to think there was a possibility he was 

Page | 431 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



innocent. They weren’t responsible for their actions. 
On the other hand, their interference might have 
permitted Black to escape. ... They obviously thought 
they were going to catch Black single-handed. They’ve 
got away with a great deal before now. ... I’m afraid 
it’s given them a rather high opinion of themselves ... 
and of course Potter has always been allowed an 
extraordinary amount of license by the headmaster — 



“Ah, well, Snape ... Harry Potter, you know ... we’ve 
all got a bit of a blind spot where he’s concerned.” 

“And yet — is it good for him to be given so much 
special treatment? Personally, I try and treat him like 
any other student. And any other student would be 
suspended — at the very least — for leading his 
friends into such danger. Consider, Minister — 
against all school rules — after all the precautions 
put in place for his protection — out-of-bounds, at 
night, consorting with a werewolf and a murderer — 
and I have reason to believe he has been visiting 
Hogsmeade illegally too — ” 

“Well, well ... we shall see, Snape, we shall see. ... The 
boy has undoubtedly been foolish. ...” 

Harry lay listening with his eyes tight shut. He felt 
very groggy. The words he was hearing seemed to be 
traveling very slowly from his ears to his brain, so 
that it was difficult to understand. ... His limbs felt 
like lead; his eyelids too heavy to lift. ... He wanted to 
lie here, on this comfortable bed, forever. ... 

“What amazes me most is the behavior of the 
dementors ... you’ve really no idea what made them 
retreat, Snape?” 



Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“No, Minister ... by the time I had come ’round they 
were heading back to their positions at the entrances. 



“Extraordinary. And yet Black, and Harry, and the girl 



“All unconscious by the time I reached them. I bound 
and gagged Black, naturally, conjured stretchers, and 
brought them all straight back to the castle.” 

There was a pause. Harry’s brain seemed to be 
moving a little faster, and as it did, a gnawing 
sensation grew in the pit of his stomach. ... 

He opened his eyes. 

Everything was slightly blurred. Somebody had 
removed his glasses. He was lying in the dark hospital 
wing. At the very end of the ward, he could make out 
Madam Pomfrey with her back to him, bending over a 
bed. Harry squinted. Ron’s red hair was visible 
beneath Madam Pomfrey’s arm. 

Harry moved his head over on the pillow. In the bed 
to his right lay Hermione. Moonlight was falling 
across her bed. Her eyes were open too. She looked 
petrified, and when she saw that Harry was awake, 
pressed a finger to her lips, then pointed to the 
hospital wing door. It was ajar, and the voices of 
Cornelius Fudge and Snape were coming through it 
from the corridor outside. 

Madam Pomfrey now came walking briskly up the 
dark ward to Harry’s bed. He turned to look at her. 
She was carrying the largest block of chocolate he 
had ever seen in his life. It looked like a small 
boulder. 



Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah, you’re awake!” she said briskly. She placed the 
chocolate on Harry’s bedside table and began 
breaking it apart with a small hammer. 

“How’s Ron?” said Harry and Hermione together. 

“He’ll live,” said Madam Pomfrey grimly. “As for you 
two ... you’ll be staying here until I’m satisfied you’re 
— Potter, what do you think you’re doing?” 

Harry was sitting up, putting his glasses back on, and 
picking up his wand. 

“I need to see the headmaster,” he said. 

“Potter,” said Madam Pomfrey soothingly, “it’s all 
right. They’ve got Black. He’s locked away upstairs. 
The dementors will be performing the kiss any 
moment now — ” 

“WHAT?” 

Harry jumped up out of bed; Hermione had done the 
same. But his shout had been heard in the corridor 
outside; next second, Cornelius Fudge and Snape had 
entered the ward. 

“Harry, Harry, what’s this?” said Fudge, looking 
agitated. “You should be in bed — has he had any 
chocolate?” he asked Madam Pomfrey anxiously. 

“Minister, listen!” Harry said. “Sirius Black’s innocent! 
Peter Pettigrew faked his own death! We saw him 
tonight! You can’t let the dementors do that thing to 
Sirius, he’s — ” 

But Fudge was shaking his head with a small smile 
on his face. 



Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry, Harry, you’re very confused, you’ve been 
through a dreadful ordeal, lie back down, now, we’ve 
got everything under control. ...” 

“YOU HAVEN’T!” Harry yelled. “YOU VE GOT THE 
WRONG MAN!” 

“Minister, listen, please,” Hermione said; she had 
hurried to Harry’s side and was gazing imploringly 
into Fudge’s face. “I saw him too. It was Ron’s rat, 
he’s an Animagus, Pettigrew, I mean, and — ” 

“You see, Minister?” said Snape. “Confunded, both of 
them. ... Black’s done a very good job on them. ...” 

“WE’RE NOT CONFUNDED!” Harry roared. 

“Minister! Professor!” said Madam Pomfrey angrily. “I 
must insist that you leave. Potter is my patient, and 
he should not be distressed!” 

“I’m not distressed, I’m trying to tell them what 
happened!” Harry said furiously. “If they’d just listen 



But Madam Pomfrey suddenly stuffed a large chunk 
of chocolate into Harry’s mouth; he choked, and she 
seized the opportunity to force him back onto the bed. 

“Now, please, Minister, these children need care. 
Please leave — ” 

The door opened again. It was Dumbledore. Harry 
swallowed his mouthful of chocolate with great 
difficulty and got up again. 

“Professor Dumbledore, Sirius Black — ” 



Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“For heaven’s sake!” said Madam Pomfrey 
hysterically. “Is this a hospital wing or not? 
Headmaster, I must insist — ” 

“My apologies, Poppy, but I need a word with Mr. 
Potter and Miss Granger,” said Dumbledore calmly. “I 
have just been talking to Sirius Black — ” 

“I suppose he’s told you the same fairy tale he’s 
planted in Potter’s mind?” spat Snape. “Something 
about a rat, and Pettigrew being alive — ” 

“That, indeed, is Black’s story,” said Dumbledore, 
surveying Snape closely through his half-moon 
spectacles. 

“And does my evidence count for nothing?” snarled 
Snape. “Peter Pettigrew was not in the Shrieking 
Shack, nor did I see any sign of him on the grounds.” 

“That was because you were knocked out, Professor!” 
said Hermione earnestly. “You didn’t arrive in time to 
hear — ” 

“Miss Granger, HOLD YOUR TONGUE!” 

“Now, Snape,” said Fudge, startled, “the young lady is 
disturbed in her mind, we must make allowances — ” 

“I would like to speak to Harry and Hermione alone,” 
said Dumbledore abruptly. “Cornelius, Severus, 

Poppy — please leave us.” 

“Headmaster!” sputtered Madam Pomfrey “They need 
treatment, they need rest — ” 

“This cannot wait,” said Dumbledore. “I must insist.” 



Page | 436 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Madam Pomfrey pursed her lips and strode away into 
her office at the end of the ward, slamming the door 
behind her. Fudge consulted the large gold pocket 
watch dangling from his waistcoat. 

“The dementors should have arrived by now,” he said. 
“Ill go and meet them. Dumbledore, 111 see you 
upstairs.” 

He crossed to the door and held it open for Snape, 
but Snape hadn’t moved. 

“You surely don’t believe a word of Black’s story?” 
Snape whispered, his eyes fixed on Dumbledore ’s 
face. 

“I wish to speak to Harry and Hermione alone,” 
Dumbledore repeated. 

Snape took a step toward Dumbledore. 

“Sirius Black showed he was capable of murder at the 
age of sixteen,” he breathed. “You haven’t forgotten 
that, Headmaster? You haven’t forgotten that he once 
tried to kill me?” 

“My memory is as good as it ever was, Severus,” said 
Dumbledore quietly. 

Snape turned on his heel and marched through the 
door Fudge was still holding. It closed behind them, 
and Dumbledore turned to Harry and Hermione. They 
both burst into speech at the same time. 

“Professor, Black’s telling the truth — we saw 
Pettigrew — ” 

“ — he escaped when Professor Lupin turned into a 
werewolf — ” 

Page | 437 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — he’s a rat — ” 



“ — Pettigrew’s front paw, I mean, finger, he cut it off 



“ — Pettigrew attacked Ron, it wasn’t Sirius — ” 

But Dumbledore held up his hand to stem the flood of 
explanations. 

“It is your turn to listen, and I beg you will not 
interrupt me, because there is very little time,” he 
said quietly. “There is not a shred of proof to support 
Black’s story, except your word — and the word of 
two thirteen-year-old wizards will not convince 
anybody. A street full of eyewitnesses swore they saw 
Sirius murder Pettigrew. I myself gave evidence to the 
Ministry that Sirius had been the Potters’ Secret- 
Keeper.” 

“Professor Lupin can tell you — ” Harry said, unable to 
stop himself. 

“Professor Lupin is currently deep in the forest, 
unable to tell anyone anything. By the time he is 
human again, it will be too late, Sirius will be worse 
than dead. I might add that werewolves are so 
mistrusted by most of our kind that his support will 
count for very little — and the fact that he and Sirius 
are old friends — ” 

“But — ” 

“ Listen to me, Harry. It is too late, you understand 
me? You must see that Professor Snape’s version of 
events is far more convincing than yours.” 

“He hates Sirius,” Hermione said desperately. “All 
because of some stupid trick Sirius played on him — ” 

Page | 438 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sirius has not acted like an innocent man. The 
attack on the Fat Lady — entering Gryffindor Tower 
with a knife — without Pettigrew, alive or dead, we 
have no chance of overturning Sirius’s sentence.” 

“But you believe us.” 

“Yes, I do,” said Dumbledore quietly. “But I have no 
power to make other men see the truth, or to overrule 
the Minister of Magic. ...” 

Harry stared up into the grave face and felt as though 
the ground beneath him were falling sharply away. He 
had grown used to the idea that Dumbledore could 
solve anything. He had expected Dumbledore to pull 
some amazing solution out of the air. But no . . . their 
last hope was gone. 

“What we need,” said Dumbledore slowly, and his 
light blue eyes moved from Harry to Hermione, “is 
more time.” 

“But — ” Hermione began. And then her eyes became 
very round. “OH!” 

“Now, pay attention,” said Dumbledore, speaking very 
low, and very clearly. “Sirius is locked in Professor 
Flitwick’s office on the seventh floor. Thirteenth 
window from the right of the West Tower. If all goes 
well, you will be able to save more than one innocent 
life tonight. But remember this, both of you: you must 
not be seen. Miss Granger, you know the law — you 
know what is at stake. ... You — must — not — be — 
seen.” 

Harry didn’t have a clue what was going on. 
Dumbledore had turned on his heel and looked back 
as he reached the door. 



Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I am going to lock you in. It is — ” he consulted his 
watch, “five minutes to midnight. Miss Granger, three 
turns should do it. Good luck.” 

“Good luck?” Harry repeated as the door closed 
behind Dumbledore. “Three turns? What’s he talking 
about? What are we supposed to do?” 

But Hermione was fumbling with the neck of her 
robes, pulling from beneath them a very long, very 
fine gold chain. 

“Harry, come here,” she said urgently. “Quick).” 

Harry moved toward her, completely bewildered. She 
was holding the chain out. He saw a tiny, sparkling 
hourglass hanging from it. 

“Here — ” 

She had thrown the chain around his neck too. 

“Ready?” she said breathlessly. 

“What are we doing?” Harry said, completely lost. 

Hermione turned the hourglass over three times. 

The dark ward dissolved. Harry had the sensation 
that he was flying very fast, backward. A blur of 
colors and shapes rushed past him, his ears were 
pounding, he tried to yell but couldn’t hear his own 
voice — 

And then he felt solid ground beneath his feet, and 
everything came into focus again — 

He was standing next to Hermione in the deserted 
entrance hall and a stream of golden sunlight was 

Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




falling across the paved floor from the open front 
doors. He looked wildly around at Hermione, the 
chain of the hourglass cutting into his neck. 

“Hermione, what — ?” 

“In here!” Hermione seized Harry’s arm and dragged 
him across the hall to the door of a broom closet; she 
opened it, pushed him inside among the buckets and 
mops, then slammed the door behind them. 

“What — how — Hermione, what happened?” 

“We’ve gone back in time,” Hermione whispered, 
lifting the chain off Harry’s neck in the darkness. 
“Three hours back ...” 

Harry found his own leg and gave it a very hard 
pinch. It hurt a lot, which seemed to rule out the 
possibility that he was having a very bizarre dream. 

“But — ” 

“Shh! Listen! Someone’s coming! I think — I think it 
might be us!” 

Hermione had her ear pressed against the cupboard 
door. 

“Footsteps across the hall ... yes, I think it’s us going 
down to Hagrid’s!” 

“Are you telling me,” Harry whispered, “that we’re 
here in this cupboard and we’re out there too?” 

“Yes,” said Hermione, her ear still glued to the 
cupboard door. “I’m sure it’s us. It doesn’t sound like 
more than three people ... and we’re walking slowly 
because we’re under the Invisibility Cloak — ” 

Page | 441 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




She broke off, still listening intently. 



“We’ve gone down the front steps. ...” 

Hermione sat down on an upturned bucket, looking 
desperately anxious, but Harry wanted a few 
questions answered. 

“Where did you get that hourglass thing?” 

“It’s called a Time-Turner,” Hermione whispered, “and 
I got it from Professor McGonagall on our first day 
back. I’ve been using it all year to get to all my 
lessons. Professor McGonagall made me swear I 
wouldn’t tell anyone. She had to write all sorts of 
letters to the Ministry of Magic so I could have one. 
She had to tell them that I was a model student, and 
that I’d never, ever use it for anything except my 
studies. ... I’ve been turning it back so I could do 
hours over again, that’s how I’ve been doing several 
lessons at once, see? But ... 

“Harry, I don’t understand what Dumbledore wants us 
to do. Why did he tell us to go back three hours? 

How’s that going to help Sirius?” 

Harry stared at her shadowy face. 

“There must be something that happened around now 
he wants us to change,” he said slowly. “What 
happened? We were walking down to Hagrid’s three 
hours ago. ...” 

“This is three hours ago, and we are walking down to 
Hagrid’s,” said Hermione. “We just heard ourselves 
leaving. ...” 

Harry frowned; he felt as though he were screwing up 
his whole brain in concentration. 

Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Dumbledore just said — just said we could save 
more than one innocent life. ...” And then it hit him. 
“Hermione, we’re going to save Buckbeak!” 

“But — how will that help Sirius?” 

“Dumbledore said — he just told us where the 
window is — the window of Flitwick’s office! Where 
they’ve got Sirius locked up! We’ve got to fly 
Buckbeak up to the window and rescue Sirius! Sirius 
can escape on Buckbeak — they can escape together!” 

From what Harry could see of Hermione’s face, she 
looked terrified. 

“If we manage that without being seen, it’ll be a 
miracle!” 

“Well, we’ve got to try, haven’t we?” said Harry. He 
stood up and pressed his ear against the door. 

“Doesn’t sound like anyone’s there. ... Come on, let’s 

go. ...” 

Harry pushed open the closet door. The entrance hall 
was deserted. As quietly and quickly as they could, 
they darted out of the closet and down the stone 
steps. The shadows were already lengthening, the 
tops of the trees in the Forbidden Forest gilded once 
more with gold. 

“If anyone’s looking out of the window — ” Hermione 
squeaked, looking up at the castle behind them. 

“Well run for it,” said Harry determinedly. “Straight 
into the forest, all right? We’ll have to hide behind a 
tree or something and keep a lookout — ” 



Page | 443 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Okay, but well go around by the greenhouses!” said 
Hermione breathlessly. “We need to keep out of sight 
of Hagrid’s front door, or well see us! We must be 
nearly at Hagrid’s by now!” 

Still working out what she meant, Harry set off at a 
sprint, Hermione behind him. They tore across the 
vegetable gardens to the greenhouses, paused for a 
moment behind them, then set off again, fast as they 
could, skirting around the Whomping Willow, tearing 
toward the shelter of the forest. ... 

Safe in the shadows of the trees, Harry turned 
around; seconds later, Hermione arrived beside him, 
panting. 

“Right,” she gasped. “We need to sneak over to 
Hagrid’s. ... Keep out of sight, Harry. ...” 

They made their way silently through the trees, 
keeping to the very edge of the forest. Then, as they 
glimpsed the front of Hagrid’s house, they heard a 
knock upon his door. They moved quickly behind a 
wide oak trunk and peered out from either side. 

Hagrid had appeared in his doorway, shaking and 
white, looking around to see who had knocked. And 
Harry heard his own voice. 

“It’s us. We’re wearing the Invisibility Cloak. Let us in 
and we can take it off.” 

“Yeh shouldn’ve come!” Hagrid whispered. He stood 
back, then shut the door quickly. 

“This is the weirdest thing we’ve ever done,” Harry 
said fervently. 

“Let’s move along a bit,” Hermione whispered. “We 
need to get nearer to Buckbeak!” 

Page | 444 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They crept through the trees until they saw the 
nervous hippogriff, tethered to the fence around 
Hagrid’s pumpkin patch. 

“Now?” Harry whispered. 

“No!” said Hermione. “If we steal him now, those 
Committee people will think Hagrid set him free! 

We’ve got to wait until they’ve seen he’s tied outside!” 

“That’s going to give us about sixty seconds,” said 
Harry. This was starting to seem impossible. 

At that moment, there was a crash of breaking china 
from inside Hagrid’s cabin. 

“That’s Hagrid breaking the milk jug,” Hermione 
whispered. “I’m going to find Scabbers in a moment — 



Sure enough, a few minutes later, they heard 
Hermione ’s shriek of surprise. 

“Hermione,” said Harry suddenly, “what if we — we 
just run in there and grab Pettigrew — ” 

“No!” said Hermione in a terrified whisper. “Don’t you 
understand? We’re breaking one of the most 
important wizarding laws! Nobody’s supposed to 
change time, nobody! You heard Dumbledore, if we’re 
seen — ” 

“We’d only be seen by ourselves and Hagrid!” 

“Harry, what do you think you’d do if you saw 
yourself bursting into Hagrid’s house?” said 
Hermione. 



Page | 445 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I’d — I’d think I’d gone mad,” said Harry, “or I’d think 
there was some Dark Magic going on — ” 



“ Exactly ! You wouldn’t understand, you might even 
attack yourself! Don’t you see? Professor McGonagall 
told me what awful things have happened when 
wizards have meddled with time. ... Loads of them 
ended up killing their past or future selves by 
mistake!” 

“Okay!” said Harry. “It was just an idea, I just thought 



But Hermione nudged him and pointed toward the 
castle. Harry moved his head a few inches to get a 
clear view of the distant front doors. Dumbledore, 
Fudge, the old Committee member, and Macnair the 
executioner were coming down the steps. 

“We’re about to come out!” Hermione breathed. 

And sure enough, moments later, Hagrid’s back door 
opened, and Harry saw himself, Ron, and Hermione 
walking out of it with Hagrid. It was, without a doubt, 
the strangest sensation of his life, standing behind 
the tree, and watching himself in the pumpkin patch. 

“It’s okay, Beaky, it’s okay ... ,” Hagrid said to 
Buckbeak. Then he turned to Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione. “Go on. Get goin’.” 

“Hagrid, we can’t — ” 

“Well tell them what really happened — ” 

“They can’t kill him — ” 

“Go! It’s bad enough without you lot in trouble an’ 
all!” 

Page | 446 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry watched the Hermione in the pumpkin patch 
throw the Invisibility Cloak over him and Ron. 

“Go quick. Don’ listen. ...” 

There was a knock on Hagrid’s front door. The 
execution party had arrived. Hagrid turned around 
and headed back into his cabin, leaving the back door 
ajar. Harry watched the grass flatten in patches all 
around the cabin and heard three pairs of feet 
retreating. He, Ron, and Hermione had gone ... but 
the Harry and Hermione hidden in the trees could 
now hear what was happening inside the cabin 
through the back door. 

“Where is the beast?” came the cold voice of Macnair. 

“Out — outside,” Hagrid croaked. 

Harry pulled his head out of sight as Macnair’s face 
appeared at Hagrid’s window, staring out at 
Buckbeak. Then they heard Fudge. 

“We — er — have to read you the official notice of 
execution, Hagrid. I’ll make it quick. And then you 
and Macnair need to sign it. Macnair, you’re 
supposed to listen too, that’s procedure — ” 

Macnair’s face vanished from the window. It was now 
or never. 

“Wait here,” Harry whispered to Hermione. “I’ll do it.” 

As Fudge’s voice started again, Harry darted out from 
behind his tree, vaulted the fence into the pumpkin 
patch, and approached Buckbeak. 

“It is the decision of the Committee for the Disposal of 
Dangerous Creatures that the hippogriff Buckbeak, 

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




hereafter called the condemned, shall be executed on 
the sixth of June at sundown — ” 

Careful not to blink, Harry stared up into Buckbeak’s 
fierce orange eyes once more and bowed. Buckbeak 
sank to his scaly knees and then stood up again. 
Harry began to fumble with the knot of rope tying 
Buckbeak to the fence. 

"... sentenced to execution by beheading, to be carried 
out by the Committee’s appointed executioner, Walden 
Macnair ...” 

“Come on, Buckbeak,” Harry murmured, “come on, 
we’re going to help you. Quietly ... quietly ...” 

"... as witnessed below. Hagrid, you sign here. ...” 

Harry threw all his weight onto the rope, but 
Buckbeak had dug in his front feet. 

“Well, let’s get this over with,” said the reedy voice of 
the Committee member from inside Hagrid’s cabin. 
“Hagrid, perhaps it will be better if you stay inside — ” 

“No, I — I wan’ ter be with him. ... I don’ wan’ him ter 
be alone — ” 

Footsteps echoed from within the cabin. 

“Buckbeak, move\” Harry hissed. 

Harry tugged harder on the rope around Buckbeak’s 
neck. The hippogriff began to walk, rustling its wings 
irritably. They were still ten feet away from the forest, 
in plain view of Hagrid’s back door. 

“One moment, please, Macnair,” came Dumbledore’s 
voice. “You need to sign too.” The footsteps stopped. 

Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry heaved on the rope. Buckbeak snapped his 
beak and walked a little faster. 



Hermione ’s white face was sticking out from behind a 
tree. 

“Harry, hurry!” she mouthed. 

Harry could still hear Dumbledore’s voice talking from 
within the cabin. He gave the rope another wrench. 
Buckbeak broke into a grudging trot. They had 
reached the trees. ... 

“Quick! Quick!” Hermione moaned, darting out from 
behind her tree, seizing the rope too and adding her 
weight to make Buckbeak move faster. Harry looked 
over his shoulder; they were now blocked from sight; 
they couldn’t see Hagrid’s garden at all. 

“Stop!” he whispered to Hermione. “They might hear 
us — ” 



Hagrid’s back door had opened with a bang. Harry, 
Hermione, and Buckbeak stood quite still; even the 
hippogriff seemed to be listening intently. 

Silence . . . then — 

“Where is it?” said the reedy voice of the Committee 
member. “Where is the beast?” 

“It was tied here!” said the executioner furiously. “I 
saw it! Just here!” 

“How extraordinary,” said Dumbledore. There was a 
note of amusement in his voice. 

“Beaky!” said Hagrid huskily. 

Page | 449 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was a swishing noise, and the thud of an axe. 
The executioner seemed to have swung it into the 
fence in anger. And then came the howling, and this 
time they could hear Hagrid ’s words through his sobs. 

“Gone! Gone! Bless his little beak, he’s gone\ Musta 
pulled himself free! Beaky, yeh clever boy!” 

Buckbeak started to strain against the rope, trying to 
get back to Hagrid. Harry and Hermione tightened 
their grip and dug their heels into the forest floor to 
stop him. 

“Someone untied him!” the executioner was snarling. 
“We should search the grounds, the forest — ” 

“Macnair, if Buckbeak has indeed been stolen, do you 
really think the thief will have led him away on foot?” 
said Dumbledore, still sounding amused. “Search the 
skies, if you will. ... Hagrid, I could do with a cup of 
tea. Or a large brandy.” 

“O’ — o’ course, Professor,” said Hagrid, who sounded 
weak with happiness. “Come in, come in. ...” 

Harry and Hermione listened closely. They heard 
footsteps, the soft cursing of the executioner, the 
snap of the door, and then silence once more. 

“Now what?” whispered Harry, looking around. 

“Well have to hide in here,” said Hermione, who 
looked very shaken. “We need to wait until they’ve 
gone back to the castle. Then we wait until it’s safe to 
fly Buckbeak up to Sirius’s window. He won’t be there 
for another couple of hours. ... Oh, this is going to be 
difficult. ...” 



Page | 450 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




She looked nervously over her shoulder into the 
depths of the forest. The sun was setting now. 

“We’re going to have to move,” said Harry, thinking 
hard. “We’ve got to be able to see the Whomping 
Willow, or we won’t know what’s going on.” 

“Okay,” said Hermione, getting a firmer grip on 
Buckbeak’s rope. “But we’ve got to keep out of sight, 
Harry, remember. ...” 

They moved around the edge of the forest, darkness 
falling thickly around them, until they were hidden 
behind a clump of trees through which they could 
make out the Willow. 

“There’s Ron!” said Harry suddenly. 

A dark figure was sprinting across the lawn and its 
shout echoed through the still night air. 

“Get away from him — get away — Scabbers, come 
here — ” 

And then they saw two more figures materialize out of 
nowhere. Harry watched himself and Hermione 
chasing after Ron. Then he saw Ron dive. 

“Gotchcd Get off, you stinking cat — ” 

“There’s Sirius!” said Harry. The great shape of the 
dog had bounded out from the roots of the Willow. 
They saw him bowl Harry over, then seize Ron. ... 

“Looks even worse from here, doesn’t it?” said Harry, 
watching the dog pulling Ron into the roots. “Ouch — 
look, I just got walloped by the tree — and so did you 
— this is weird — ” 



Page | 451 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Whomping Willow was creaking and lashing out 
with its lower branches; they could see themselves 
darting here and there, trying to reach the trunk. And 
then the tree froze. 

“That was Crookshanks pressing the knot,” said 
Hermione. 

“And there we go ... ,” Harry muttered. “We’re in.” 

The moment they disappeared, the tree began to move 
again. Seconds later, they heard footsteps quite close 
by. Dumbledore, Macnair, Fudge, and the old 
Committee member were making their way up to the 
castle. 

“Right after we’d gone down into the passage!” said 
Hermione. “If only Dumbledore had come with us ...” 

“Macnair and Fudge would’ve come too,” said Harry 
bitterly. “I bet you anything Fudge would’ve told 
Macnair to murder Sirius on the spot. ...” 

They watched the four men climb the castle steps and 
disappear from view. For a few minutes the scene was 
deserted. Then — 

“Here comes Lupin!” said Harry as they saw another 
figure sprinting down the stone steps and haring 
toward the Willow. Harry looked up at the sky. Clouds 
were obscuring the moon completely. 

They watched Lupin seize a broken branch from the 
ground and prod the knot on the trunk. The tree 
stopped fighting, and Lupin, too, disappeared into the 
gap in its roots. 

“If he’d only grabbed the cloak,” said Harry. “It’s just 
lying there. ...” 

Page | 452 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He turned to Hermione. 



“If I just dashed out now and grabbed it, Snape’d 
never be able to get it and — ” 

“Harry, we mustn’t be seen!” 

“How can you stand this?” he asked Hermione 
fiercely. “Just standing here and watching it happen?” 
He hesitated. “I’m going to grab the cloak!” 

“Harry, no!” 

Hermione seized the back of Harry’s robes not a 
moment too soon. Just then, they heard a burst of 
song. It was Hagrid, making his way up to the castle, 
singing at the top of his voice, and weaving slightly as 
he walked. A large bottle was swinging from his 
hands. 

“See?” Hermione whispered. “See what would have 
happened? We’ve got to keep out of sight! No, 
Buckbeak).” 

The hippogriff was making frantic attempts to get to 
Hagrid again; Harry seized his rope too, straining to 
hold Buckbeak back. They watched Hagrid meander 
tipsily up to the castle. He was gone. Buckbeak 
stopped fighting to get away. His head drooped sadly. 

Barely two minutes later, the castle doors flew open 
yet again, and Snape came charging out of them, 
running toward the Willow. 

Harry’s fists clenched as they watched Snape skid to 
a halt next to the tree, looking around. He grabbed 
the cloak and held it up. 



Page | 453 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get your filthy hands off it,” Harry snarled under his 
breath. 

“Shh!” 

Snape seized the branch Lupin had used to freeze the 
tree, prodded the knot, and vanished from view as he 
put on the cloak. 

“So that’s it,” said Hermione quietly. “We’re all down 
there ... and now we’ve just got to wait until we come 
back up again. ...” 

She took the end of Buckbeak’s rope and tied it 
securely around the nearest tree, then sat down on 
the dry ground, arms around her knees. 

“Harry, there’s something I don’t understand. ... Why 
didn’t the dementors get Sirius? I remember them 
coming, and then I think I passed out . . . there were 
so many of them. ...” 

Harry sat down too. He explained what he’d seen; 
how, as the nearest dementor had lowered its mouth 
to Harry’s, a large silver something had come 
galloping across the lake and forced the dementors to 
retreat. 

Hermione ’s mouth was slightly open by the time 
Harry had finished. 

“But what was it?” 

“There’s only one thing it could have been, to make 
the dementors go,” said Harry. “A real Patronus. A 
powerful one.” 

“But who conjured it?” 



Page | 454 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry didn’t say anything. He was thinking back to 
the person he’d seen on the other bank of the lake. He 
knew who he thought it had been . . . but how could it 
have been? 

“Didn’t you see what they looked like?” said Hermione 
eagerly. “Was it one of the teachers?” 

“No,” said Harry. “He wasn’t a teacher.” 

“But it must have been a really powerful wizard, to 
drive all those dementors away. ... If the Patronus 
was shining so brightly, didn’t it light him up? 
Couldn’t you see — ?” 

“Yeah, I saw him,” said Harry slowly. “But ... maybe I 
imagined it. ... I wasn’t thinking straight. ... I passed 
out right afterward. ...” 

“ Who did you think it was?” 

“I think — ” Harry swallowed, knowing how strange 
this was going to sound. “I think it was my dad.” 

Harry glanced up at Hermione and saw that her 
mouth was fully open now. She was gazing at him 
with a mixture of alarm and pity. 

“Harry, your dad’s — well — dead,” she said quietly. 

“I know that,” said Harry quickly. 

“You think you saw his ghost?” 

“I don’t know ... no ... he looked solid. ...” 

“But then — ” 



Page | 455 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Maybe I was seeing things,” said Harry. “But ... from 
what I could see ... it looked like him. ... I’ve got 
photos of him. ...” 

Hermione was still looking at him as though worried 
about his sanity. 

“I know it sounds crazy,” said Harry flatly. He turned 
to look at Buckbeak, who was digging his beak into 
the ground, apparently searching for worms. But he 
wasn’t really watching Buckbeak. 

He was thinking about his father and about his 
father’s three oldest friends ... Moony, Wormtail, 
Padfoot, and Prongs. ... Had all four of them been out 
on the grounds tonight? Wormtail had reappeared 
this evening when everyone had thought he was dead. 
... Was it so impossible his father had done the same? 
Had he been seeing things across the lake? The figure 
had been too far away to see distinctly . . . yet he had 
felt sure, for a moment, before he’d lost 
consciousness. ... 

The leaves overhead rustled faintly in the breeze. The 
moon drifted in and out of sight behind the shifting 
clouds. Hermione sat with her face turned toward the 
Willow, waiting. 

And then, at last, after over an hour . . . 

“Here we come!” Hermione whispered. 

She and Harry got to their feet. Buckbeak raised his 
head. They saw Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron clambering 
awkwardly out of the hole in the roots . . . followed by 
the unconscious Snape, drifting weirdly upward. Next 
came Harry, Hermione, and Black. They all began to 
walk toward the castle. 



Page | 456 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s heart was starting to beat very fast. He 
glanced up at the sky. Any moment now, that cloud 
was going to move aside and show the moon. ... 

“Harry,” Hermione muttered as though she knew 
exactly what he was thinking, “we’ve got to stay put. 
We mustn’t be seen. There’s nothing we can do. ...” 

“So we’re just going to let Pettigrew escape all over 
again. ...” said Harry quietly. 

“How do you expect to find a rat in the dark?” 
snapped Hermione. “There’s nothing we can do! We 
came back to help Sirius; we’re not supposed to be 
doing anything else!” 

“ All right'.” 

The moon slid out from behind its cloud. They saw 
the tiny figures across the grounds stop. Then they 
saw movement — 

“There goes Lupin,” Hermione whispered. “He’s 
transforming — ” 

“Hermione!” said Harry suddenly. “We’ve got to move!” 

“We mustn’t, I keep telling you — ” 

“Not to interfere! Lupin’s going to run into the forest, 
right at us!” 

Hermione gasped. 

“Quick!” she moaned, dashing to untie Buckbeak. 
“Quick! Where are we going to go? Where are we going 
to hide? The dementors will be coming any moment — 



Page | 457 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Back to Hagrid’s!” Harry said. “It’s empty now — 
come on!” 

They ran as fast as they could, Buckbeak cantering 
along behind them. They could hear the werewolf 
howling behind them. ... 

The cabin was in sight; Harry skidded to the door, 
wrenched it open, and Hermione and Buckbeak 
flashed past him; Harry threw himself in after them 
and bolted the door. Fang the boarhound barked 
loudly. 

“Shh, Fang, it’s us!” said Hermione, hurrying over and 
scratching his ears to quieten him. “That was really 
close!” she said to Harry. 

“Yeah ...” 

Harry was looking out of the window. It was much 
harder to see what was going on from here. Buckbeak 
seemed very happy to find himself back inside 
Hagrid’s house. He lay down in front of the fire, folded 
his wings contentedly, and seemed ready for a good 
nap. 

“I think I’d better go outside again, you know,” said 
Harry slowly. “I can’t see what’s going on — we won’t 
know when it’s time — ” 

Hermione looked up. Her expression was suspicious. 

“I’m not going to try and interfere,” said Harry 
quickly. “But if we don’t see what’s going on, how’re 
we going to know when it’s time to rescue Sirius?” 

“Well ... okay, then ... I’ll wait here with Buckbeak ... 
but Harry, be careful — there’s a werewolf out there 
— and the dementors — ” 

Page | 458 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stepped outside again and edged around the 
cabin. He could hear yelping in the distance. That 
meant the dementors were closing in on Sirius. ... He 
and Hermione would be running to him any moment. 



Harry stared out toward the lake, his heart doing a 
kind of drumroll in his chest. ... Whoever had sent 
that Patronus would be appearing at any moment. ... 

For a fraction of a second he stood, irresolute, in front 
of Hagrid’s door. You must not be seen. But he didn’t 
want to be seen. He wanted to do the seeing. ... He 
had to know. . . . 

And there were the dementors. They were emerging 
out of the darkness from every direction, gliding 
around the edges of the lake. ... They were moving 
away from where Harry stood, to the opposite bank. 

... He wouldn’t have to get near them. ... 

Harry began to run. He had no thought in his head 
except his father. ... If it was him ... if it really was 
him ... he had to know, had to find out. ... 

The lake was coming nearer and nearer, but there 
was no sign of anybody. On the opposite bank, he 
could see tiny glimmers of silver — his own attempts 
at a Patronus — 

There was a bush at the very edge of the water. Harry 
threw himself behind it, peering desperately through 
the leaves. On the opposite bank, the glimmers of 
silver were suddenly extinguished. A terrified 
excitement shot through him — any moment now — 

“Come on!” he muttered, staring about. “Where are 
you? Dad, come on — ” 



Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But no one came. Harry raised his head to look at the 
circle of dementors across the lake. One of them was 
lowering its hood. It was time for the rescuer to 
appear — but no one was coming to help this time — 

And then it hit him — he understood. He hadn’t seen 
his father — he had seen himself — 

Harry flung himself out from behind the bush and 
pulled out his wand. 

“EXPECTO PATRONUM ” he yelled. 

And out of the end of his wand burst, not a shapeless 
cloud of mist, but a blinding, dazzling, silver animal. 
He screwed up his eyes, trying to see what it was. It 
looked like a horse. It was galloping silently away 
from him, across the black surface of the lake. He 
saw it lower its head and charge at the swarming 
dementors. ... Now it was galloping around and 
around the black shapes on the ground, and the 
dementors were falling back, scattering, retreating 
into the darkness. ... They were gone. 

The Patronus turned. It was cantering back toward 
Harry across the still surface of the water. It wasn’t a 
horse. It wasn’t a unicorn, either. It was a stag. It was 
shining brightly as the moon above ... it was coming 
back to him. ... 

It stopped on the bank. Its hooves made no mark on 
the soft ground as it stared at Harry with its large, 
silver eyes. Slowly, it bowed its antlered head. And 
Harry realized . . . 

“Prongs,” he whispered. 

But as his trembling fingertips stretched toward the 
creature, it vanished. 

Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stood there, hand still outstretched. Then, with 
a great leap of his heart, he heard hooves behind him 
— he whirled around and saw Hermione dashing 
toward him, dragging Buckbeak behind her. 

“What did you do?” she said fiercely. “You said you 
were only going to keep a lookout!” 

“I just saved all our lives ... ,” said Harry. “Get behind 
here — behind this bush — I’ll explain.” 

Hermione listened to what had just happened with 
her mouth open yet again. 

“Did anyone see you?” 

“Yes, haven’t you been listening? I saw me but I 
thought I was my dad! It’s okay!” 

“Harry, I can’t believe it. ... You conjured up a 
Patronus that drove away all those dementors! That’s 
very, very advanced magic. ...” 

“I knew I could do it this time,” said Harry, “because 
I’d already done it. ... Does that make sense?” 

“I don’t know — Harry, look at Snape!” 

Together they peered around the bush at the other 
bank. Snape had regained consciousness. He was 
conjuring stretchers and lifting the limp forms of 
Harry, Hermione, and Black onto them. A fourth 
stretcher, no doubt bearing Ron, was already floating 
at his side. Then, wand held out in front of him, he 
moved them away toward the castle. 

“Right, it’s nearly time,” said Hermione tensely, 
looking at her watch. “We’ve got about forty-five 
minutes until Dumbledore locks the door to the 

Page | 461 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




hospital wing. We’ve got to rescue Sirius and get back 
into the ward before anybody realizes we’re missing. 



They waited, watching the moving clouds reflected in 
the lake, while the bush next to them whispered in 
the breeze. Buckbeak, bored, was ferreting for worms 
again. 

“D’you reckon he’s up there yet?” said Harry, 
checking his watch. He looked up at the castle and 
began counting the windows to the right of the West 
Tower. 

“Look!” Hermione whispered. “Who’s that? Someone’s 
coming back out of the castle!” 

Harry stared through the darkness. The man was 
hurrying across the grounds, toward one of the 
entrances. Something shiny glinted in his belt. 

“Macnair!” said Harry. “The executioner! He’s gone to 
get the dementors! This is it, Hermione — ” 

Hermione put her hands on Buckbeak’s back and 
Harry gave her a leg up. Then he placed his foot on 
one of the lower branches of the bush and climbed up 
in front of her. He pulled Buckbeak’s rope back over 
his neck and tied it to the other side of his collar like 
reins. 

“Ready?” he whispered to Hermione. “You’d better 
hold on to me — ” 

He nudged Buckbeak’s sides with his heels. 

Buckbeak soared straight into the dark air. Harry 
gripped his flanks with his knees, feeling the great 
wings rising powerfully beneath them. Hermione was 

Page | 462 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




holding Harry very tight around the waist; he could 
hear her muttering, “Oh, no — I don’t like this — oh, I 
really don’t like this — ” 

Harry urged Buckbeak forward. They were gliding 
quietly toward the upper floors of the castle. ... Harry 
pulled hard on the left-hand side of the rope, and 
Buckbeak turned. Harry was trying to count the 
windows flashing past — 

“Whoa!” he said, pulling backward as hard as he 
could. 

Buckbeak slowed down and they found themselves at 
a stop, unless you counted the fact that they kept 
rising up and down several feet as the hippogriff beat 
his wings to remain airborne. 

“He’s there!” Harry said, spotting Sirius as they rose 
up beside the window. He reached out, and as 
Buckbeak’s wings fell, was able to tap sharply on the 
glass. 

Black looked up. Harry saw his jaw drop. He leapt 
from his chair, hurried to the window and tried to 
open it, but it was locked. 

“Stand back!” Hermione called to him, and she took 
out her wand, still gripping the back of Harry’s robes 
with her left hand. 

“Alohomoral” 

The window sprang open. 

“How — how — ?” said Black weakly, staring at the 
hippogriff. 



Page | 463 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get on — there’s not much time,” said Harry, 
gripping Buckbeak firmly on either side of his sleek 
neck to hold him steady. “You’ve got to get out of here 

— the dementors are coming — Macnair’s gone to get 
them.” 

Black placed a hand on either side of the window 
frame and heaved his head and shoulders out of it. It 
was very lucky he was so thin. In seconds, he had 
managed to fling one leg over Buckbeak’s back and 
pull himself onto the hippogriff behind Hermione. 

“Okay, Buckbeak, up!” said Harry, shaking the rope. 
“Up to the tower — come on!” 

The hippogriff gave one sweep of its mighty wings and 
they were soaring upward again, high as the top of 
the West Tower. Buckbeak landed with a clatter on 
the battlements, and Harry and Hermione slid off him 
at once. 

“Sirius, you’d better go, quick,” Harry panted. “They’ll 
reach Flitwick’s office any moment, they’ll find out 
you’re gone.” 

Buckbeak pawed the ground, tossing his sharp head. 

“What happened to the other boy? Ron?” croaked 
Sirius. 

“He’s going to be okay. He’s still out of it, but Madam 
Pomfrey says shell be able to make him better. Quick 

- go 



But Black was still staring down at Harry. 

“How can I ever thank — ” 

“GO!” Harry and Hermione shouted together. 

Page | 464 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black wheeled Buckbeak around, facing the open sky. 

“Well see each other again,” he said. “You are — truly 
your father’s son, Harry. ...” 

He squeezed Buckbeak’s sides with his heels. Harry 
and Hermione jumped back as the enormous wings 
rose once more. ... The hippogriff took off into the air. 

. . . He and his rider became smaller and smaller as 
Harry gazed after them ... then a cloud drifted across 
the moon. ... They were gone. 



Page | 465 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





OWL POST AGAIN 



“Harry!” 

Hermione was tugging at his sleeve, staring at her 
watch. “We’ve got exactly ten minutes to get back 
down to the hospital wing without anybody seeing us 
— before Dumbledore locks the door — ” 

“Okay,” said Harry, wrenching his gaze from the sky, 
“let’s go. ...” 

They slipped through the doorway behind them and 
down a tightly spiraling stone staircase. As they 
reached the bottom of it, they heard voices. They 
flattened themselves against the wall and listened. It 
sounded like Fudge and Snape. They were walking 
quickly along the corridor at the foot of the staircase. 

"... only hope Dumbledore ’s not going to make 
difficulties,” Snape was saying. “The Kiss will be 
performed immediately?” 



Page | 466 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“As soon as Macnair returns with the dementors. This 
whole Black affair has been highly embarrassing. I 
can’t tell you how much I’m looking forward to 
informing the Daily Prophet that we’ve got him at last. 
...I daresay they’ll want to interview you, Snape ... 
and once young Harry’s back in his right mind, I 
expect he’ll want to tell the Prophet exactly how you 
saved him. ...” 

Harry clenched his teeth. He caught a glimpse of 
Snape’s smirk as he and Fudge passed Harry and 
Hermione’s hiding place. Their footsteps died away. 
Harry and Hermione waited a few moments to make 
sure they’d really gone, then started to run in the 
opposite direction. Down one staircase, then another, 
along a new corridor — then they heard a cackling 
ahead. 

“Peeves\” Harry muttered, grabbing Hermione’s wrist. 
“In here!” 

They tore into a deserted classroom to their left just 
in time. Peeves seemed to be bouncing along the 
corridor in boisterous good spirits, laughing his head 
off. 

“Oh, he’s horrible,” whispered Hermione, her ear to 
the door. “I bet he’s all excited because the dementors 
are going to finish off Sirius. ...” She checked her 
watch. “Three minutes, Harry!” 

They waited until Peeves ’s gloating voice had faded 
into the distance, then slid back out of the room and 
broke into a run again. 

“Hermione — what’ll happen — if we don’t get back 
inside — before Dumbledore locks the door?” Harry 
panted. 



Page | 467 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t want to think about it!” Hermione moaned, 
checking her watch again. “One minute!” 

They had reached the end of the corridor with the 
hospital wing entrance. “Okay — I can hear 
Dumbledore,” said Hermione tensely. “Come on, 
Harry!” 

They crept along the corridor. The door opened. 
Dumbledore ’s back appeared. 

“I am going to lock you in,” they heard him saying. “It 
is five minutes to midnight. Miss Granger, three turns 
should do it. Good luck.” 

Dumbledore backed out of the room, closed the door, 
and took out his wand to magically lock it. Panicking, 
Harry and Hermione ran forward. Dumbledore looked 
up, and a wide smile appeared under the long silver 
mustache. “Well?” he said quietly. 

“We did it!” said Harry breathlessly. “Sirius has gone, 
on Buckbeak. ...” 

Dumbledore beamed at them. 

“Well done. I think — ” He listened intently for any 
sound within the hospital wing. “Yes, I think you’ve 
gone too — get inside — I’ll lock you in — ” 

Harry and Hermione slipped back inside the 
dormitory. It was empty except for Ron, who was still 
lying motionless in the end bed. As the lock clicked 
behind them, Harry and Hermione crept back to their 
own beds, Hermione tucking the Time-Turner back 
under her robes. A moment later, Madam Pomfrey 
came striding back out of her office. 



Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Did I hear the headmaster leaving? Am I allowed to 
look after my patients now?” 

She was in a very bad mood. Harry and Hermione 
thought it best to accept their chocolate quietly. 
Madam Pomfrey stood over them, making sure they 
ate it. But Harry could hardly swallow. He and 
Hermione were waiting, listening, their nerves 
jangling. ... And then, as they both took a fourth piece 
of chocolate from Madam Pomfrey, they heard a 
distant roar of fury echoing from somewhere above 
them. ... 

“What was that?” said Madam Pomfrey in alarm. 

Now they could hear angry voices, growing louder and 
louder. Madam Pomfrey was staring at the door. 

“Really — they’ll wake everybody up! What do they 
think they’re doing?” 

Harry was trying to hear what the voices were saying. 
They were drawing nearer — 

“He must have Disapparated, Severus. We should 
have left somebody in the room with him. When this 
gets out — ” 

“HE DIDNT DISAPPARATE!” Snape roared, now very 
close at hand. “YOU CANT APPARATE OR 
DISAPPARATE INSIDE THIS CASTLE! THIS — HAS — 
SOMETHING — TO — DO — WITH — POTTER!” 

“Severus — be reasonable — Harry has been locked 
up-” 

BAM. 

The door of the hospital wing burst open. 

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Fudge, Snape, and Dumbledore came striding into the 
ward. Dumbledore alone looked calm. Indeed, he 
looked as though he was quite enjoying himself. 

Fudge appeared angry. But Snape was beside himself. 

“OUT WITH IT, POTTER!” he bellowed. “WHAT DID 
YOU DO?” 

“Professor Snape!” shrieked Madam Pomfrey. “Control 
yourself!” 

“See here, Snape, be reasonable,” said Fudge. “This 
door’s been locked, we just saw — ” 

“THEY HELPED HIM ESCAPE, I KNOW IT!” Snape 
howled, pointing at Harry and Hermione. His face was 
twisted; spit was flying from his mouth. 

“Calm down, man!” Fudge barked. “You’re talking 
nonsense!” 

“YOU DONT KNOW POTTER!” shrieked Snape. “HE 
DID IT, I KNOW HE DID IT — ” 

“That will do, Severus,” said Dumbledore quietly. 
“Think about what you are saying. This door has been 
locked since I left the ward ten minutes ago. Madam 
Pomfrey, have these students left their beds?” 

“Of course not!” said Madam Pomfrey, bristling. “I 
would have heard them!” 

“Well, there you have it, Severus,” said Dumbledore 
calmly. “Unless you are suggesting that Harry and 
Hermione are able to be in two places at once, I’m 
afraid I don’t see any point in troubling them further.” 

Snape stood there, seething, staring from Fudge, who 
looked thoroughly shocked at his behavior, to 

Page | 470 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore, whose eyes were twinkling behind his 
glasses. Snape whirled about, robes swishing behind 
him, and stormed out of the ward. 

“Fellow seems quite unbalanced,” said Fudge, staring 
after him. “I’d watch out for him if I were you, 
Dumbledore.” 

“Oh, he’s not unbalanced,” said Dumbledore quietly. 
“He’s just suffered a severe disappointment.” 

“He’s not the only one!” puffed Fudge. “The Daily 
Prophet’s going to have a field day! We had Black 
cornered and he slipped through our fingers yet 
again! All it needs now is for the story of that 
hippogriff’s escape to get out, and I’ll be a 
laughingstock! Well ... I’d better go and notify the 
Ministry. ...” 

“And the dementors?” said Dumbledore. “They’ll be 
removed from the school, I trust?” 

“Oh yes, they’ll have to go,” said Fudge, running his 
fingers distractedly through his hair. “Never dreamed 
they’d attempt to administer the Kiss on an innocent 
boy. ... Completely out of control ... no, I’ll have them 
packed off back to Azkaban tonight. ... Perhaps we 
should think about dragons at the school entrance. 



“Hagrid would like that,” said Dumbledore, smiling at 
Harry and Hermione. As he and Fudge left the 
dormitory, Madam Pomfrey hurried to the door and 
locked it again. Muttering angrily to herself, she 
headed back to her office. 

There was a low moan from the other end of the ward. 
Ron had woken up. They could see him sitting up, 
rubbing his head, looking around. 

Page | 471 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What — what happened?” he groaned. “Harry? Why 
are we in here? Where’s Sirius? Where’s Lupin? 

What’s going on?” 

Harry and Hermione looked at each other. 

“You explain,” said Harry, helping himself to some 
more chocolate. 

When Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the hospital 
wing at noon the next day, it was to find an almost 
deserted castle. The sweltering heat and the end of 
the exams meant that everyone was taking full 
advantage of another Hogsmeade visit. Neither Ron 
nor Hermione felt like going, however, so they and 
Harry wandered onto the grounds, still talking about 
the extraordinary events of the previous night and 
wondering where Sirius and Buckbeak were now. 
Sitting near the lake, watching the giant squid waving 
its tentacles lazily above the water, Harry lost the 
thread of the conversation as he looked across to the 
opposite bank. The stag had galloped toward him 
from there just last night. ... 

A shadow fell across them and they looked up to see a 
very bleary-eyed Hagrid, mopping his sweaty face with 
one of his tablecloth-sized handkerchiefs and 
beaming down at them. 

“Know I shouldn’ feel happy, after wha’ happened las’ 
night,” he said. “I mean, Black escapin’ again, an’ 
everythin’ — but guess what?” 

“What?” they said, pretending to look curious. 

“Beaky! He escaped! He’s free! Bin celebratin’ all 
night!” 



Page | 472 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s wonderful!” said Hermione, giving Ron a 
reproving look because he looked as though he was 
close to laughing. 

“Yeah ... can’t’ve tied him up properly,” said Hagrid, 
gazing happily out over the grounds. “I was worried 
this mornin’, mind ... thought he mighta met 
Professor Lupin on the grounds, but Lupin says he 
never ate anythin’ las’ night. ...” 

“What?” said Harry quickly. 

“Blimey, haven’ yeh heard?” said Hagrid, his smile 
fading a little. He lowered his voice, even though there 
was nobody in sight. “Er — Snape told all the 
Slytherins this mornin’. ... Thought everyone ’d know 
by now ... Professor Lupin’s a werewolf, see. An’ he 
was loose on the grounds las’ night. ... He’s packin’ 
now, o’ course.” 

“He’s packing?” said Harry, alarmed. “Why?” 

“Leavin’, isn’ he?” said Hagrid, looking surprised that 
Harry had to ask. “Resigned firs’ thing this mornin’. 
Says he can’t risk it happenin’ again.” 

Harry scrambled to his feet. 

“I’m going to see him,” he said to Ron and Hermione. 
“But if he’s resigned — ” 

“ — doesn’t sound like there’s anything we can do — ” 

“I don’t care. I still want to see him. I’ll meet you back 
here.” 

Lupin’s office door was open. He had already packed 
most of his things. The grindylow’s empty tank stood 

Page | 473 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




next to his battered old suitcase, which was open and 
nearly full. Lupin was bending over something on his 
desk and looked up only when Harry knocked on the 
door. 

“I saw you coming,” said Lupin, smiling. He pointed to 
the parchment he had been poring over. It was the 
Marauder’s Map. 

“I just saw Hagrid,” said Harry. “And he said you’d 
resigned. It’s not true, is it?” 

“I’m afraid it is,” said Lupin. He started opening his 
desk drawers and taking out the contents. 

“Why?” said Harry. “The Ministry of Magic don’t think 
you were helping Sirius, do they?” 

Lupin crossed to the door and closed it behind Harry. 

“No. Professor Dumbledore managed to convince 
Fudge that I was trying to save your lives.” He sighed. 
“That was the final straw for Severus. I think the loss 
of the Order of Merlin hit him hard. So he — er — 
accidentally let slip that I am a werewolf this morning 
at breakfast.” 

“You’re not leaving just because of that!” said Harry. 
Lupin smiled wryly. 

“This time tomorrow, the owls will start arriving from 
parents. ... They will not want a werewolf teaching 
their children, Harry. And after last night, I see their 
point. I could have bitten any of you. ... That must 
never happen again.” 

“You’re the best Defense Against the Dark Arts 
teacher we’ve ever had!” said Harry. “Don’t go!” 

Page | 474 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Lupin shook his head and didn’t speak. He carried on 
emptying his drawers. Then, while Harry was trying 
to think of a good argument to make him stay, Lupin 
said, “From what the headmaster told me this 
morning, you saved a lot of lives last night, Harry. If 
I’m proud of anything I’ve done this year, it’s how 
much you’ve learned. ... Tell me about your 
Patronus.” 

“How d’you know about that?” said Harry, distracted. 

“What else could have driven the dementors back?” 

Harry told Lupin what had happened. When he’d 
finished, Lupin was smiling again. 

“Yes, your father was always a stag when he 
transformed,” he said. “You guessed right ... that’s 
why we called him Prongs.” 

Lupin threw his last few books into his case, closed 
the desk drawers, and turned to look at Harry. 

“Here — I brought this from the Shrieking Shack last 
night,” he said, handing Harry back the Invisibility 
Cloak. “And ...” He hesitated, then held out the 
Marauder’s Map too. “I am no longer your teacher, so 
I don’t feel guilty about giving you back this as well. 
It’s no use to me, and I daresay you, Ron, and 
Hermione will find uses for it.” 

Harry took the map and grinned. 

“You told me Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs 
would’ve wanted to lure me out of school ... you said 
they’d have thought it was funny.” 

“And so we would have,” said Lupin, now reaching 
down to close his case. “I have no hesitation in saying 

Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




that James would have been highly disappointed if 
his son had never found any of the secret passages 
out of the castle.” 

There was a knock on the door. Harry hastily stuffed 
the Marauder’s Map and the Invisibility Cloak into his 
pocket. 

It was Professor Dumbledore. He didn’t look surprised 
to see Harry there. 

“Your carriage is at the gates, Remus,” he said. 

“Thank you, Headmaster.” 

Lupin picked up his old suitcase and the empty 
grindylow tank. 

“Well — good-bye, Harry,” he said, smiling. “It has 
been a real pleasure teaching you. I feel sure we’ll 
meet again sometime. Headmaster, there is no need 
to see me to the gates, I can manage. ...” 

Harry had the impression that Lupin wanted to leave 
as quickly as possible. 

“Good-bye, then, Remus,” said Dumbledore soberly. 
Lupin shifted the grindylow tank slightly so that he 
and Dumbledore could shake hands. Then, with a 
final nod to Harry and a swift smile, Lupin left the 
office. 

Harry sat down in his vacated chair, staring glumly at 
the floor. He heard the door close and looked up. 
Dumbledore was still there. 

“Why so miserable, Harry?” he said quietly. “You 
should be very proud of yourself after last night.” 



Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It didn’t make any difference,” said Harry bitterly. 
“Pettigrew got away.” 

“Didn’t make any difference?” said Dumbledore 
quietly. “It made all the difference in the world, Harry. 
You helped uncover the truth. You saved an innocent 
man from a terrible fate.” 

Terrible. Something stirred in Harry’s memory. 

Greater and more terrible than ever before ... Professor 
Trelawney’s prediction! 

“Professor Dumbledore — yesterday, when I was 
having my Divination exam, Professor Trelawney went 
very — very strange.” 

“Indeed?” said Dumbledore. “Er — stranger than 
usual, you mean?” 

“Yes . . . her voice went all deep and her eyes rolled 
and she said ... she said Voldemort’s servant was 
going to set out to return to him before midnight. ... 
She said the servant would help him come back to 
power.” Harry stared up at Dumbledore. “And then 
she sort of became normal again, and she couldn’t 
remember anything she’d said. Was it — was she 
making a real prediction?” 

Dumbledore looked mildly impressed. 

“Do you know, Harry, I think she might have been,” 
he said thoughtfully. “Who’d have thought it? That 
brings her total of real predictions up to two. I should 
offer her a pay raise. ...” 

“But — ” Harry looked at him, aghast. How could 
Dumbledore take this so calmly? 



Page | 477 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But — I stopped Sirius and Professor Lupin from 
killing Pettigrew! That makes it my fault if Voldemort 
comes back!” 



“It does not,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Hasn’t your 
experience with the Time-Turner taught you anything, 
Harry? The consequences of our actions are always so 
complicated, so diverse, that predicting the future is a 
very difficult business indeed. ... Professor Trelawney, 
bless her, is living proof of that. ... You did a very 
noble thing, in saving Pettigrew’s life.” 

“But if he helps Voldemort back to power — !” 

“Pettigrew owes his life to you. You have sent 
Voldemort a deputy who is in your debt. ... When one 
wizard saves another wizard’s life, it creates a certain 
bond between them ... and I’m much mistaken if 
Voldemort wants his servant in the debt of Harry 
Potter.” 

“I don’t want a connection with Pettigrew!” said Harry. 
“He betrayed my parents!” 

“This is magic at its deepest, its most impenetrable, 
Harry. But trust me ... the time may come when you 
will be very glad you saved Pettigrew’s life.” 

Harry couldn’t imagine when that would be. 
Dumbledore looked as though he knew what Harry 
was thinking. 

“I knew your father very well, both at Hogwarts and 
later, Harry,” he said gently. “He would have saved 
Pettigrew too, I am sure of it.” 

Harry looked up at him. Dumbledore wouldn’t laugh 
— he could tell Dumbledore . . . 

Page | 478 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought it was my dad who’d conjured my 
Patronus. I mean, when I saw myself across the lake 
...I thought I was seeing him.” 

“An easy mistake to make,” said Dumbledore softly. “I 
expect you 11 tire of hearing it, but you do look 
extraordinarily like James. Except for the eyes ... you 
have your mother’s eyes.” 

Harry shook his head. 

“It was stupid, thinking it was him,” he muttered. “I 
mean, I knew he was dead.” 

“You think the dead we loved ever truly leave us? You 
think that we don’t recall them more clearly than ever 
in times of great trouble? Your father is alive in you, 
Harry, and shows himself most plainly when you have 
need of him. How else could you produce that 
particular Patronus? Prongs rode again last night.” 

It took a moment for Harry to realize what 
Dumbledore had said. 

“Last night Sirius told me all about how they became 
Animagi,” said Dumbledore, smiling. “An 
extraordinary achievement — not least, keeping it 
quiet from me. And then I remembered the most 
unusual form your Patronus took, when it charged 
Mr. Malfoy down at your Quidditch match against 
Ravenclaw. You know, Harry, in a way, you did see 
your father last night. ... You found him inside 
yourself.” 

And Dumbledore left the office, leaving Harry to his 
very confused thoughts. 



Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Nobody at Hogwarts now knew the truth of what had 
happened the night that Sirius, Buckbeak, and 
Pettigrew had vanished except Harry, Ron, Hermione, 
and Professor Dumbledore. As the end of term 
approached, Harry heard many different theories 
about what had really happened, but none of them 
came close to the truth. 

Malfoy was furious about Buckbeak. He was 
convinced that Hagrid had found a way of smuggling 
the hippogriff to safety, and seemed outraged that he 
and his father had been outwitted by a gamekeeper. 
Percy Weasley, meanwhile, had much to say on the 
subject of Sirius’s escape. 

“If I manage to get into the Ministry, I’ll have a lot of 
proposals to make about Magical Law Enforcement!” 
he told the only person who would listen — his 
girlfriend, Penelope. 

Though the weather was perfect, though the 
atmosphere was so cheerful, though he knew they 
had achieved the near impossible in helping Sirius to 
freedom, Harry had never approached the end of a 
school year in worse spirits. 

He certainly wasn’t the only one who was sorry to see 
Professor Lupin go. The whole of Harry’s Defense 
Against the Dark Arts class was miserable about his 
resignation. 

“Wonder what they’ll give us next year?” said Seamus 
Finnigan gloomily. 

“Maybe a vampire,” suggested Dean Thomas 
hopefully. 

It wasn’t only Professor Lupin’s departure that was 
weighing on Harry’s mind. He couldn’t help thinking a 

Page | 480 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




lot about Professor Trelawney’s prediction. He kept 
wondering where Pettigrew was now, whether he had 
sought sanctuary with Voldemort yet. But the thing 
that was lowering Harry’s spirits most of all was the 
prospect of returning to the Dursleys. For maybe half 
an hour, a glorious half hour, he had believed he 
would be living with Sirius from now on . . . his 
parents’ best friend. ... It would have been the next 
best thing to having his own father back. And while 
no news of Sirius was definitely good news, because it 
meant he had successfully gone into hiding, Harry 
couldn’t help feeling miserable when he thought of 
the home he might have had, and the fact that it was 
now impossible. 

The exam results came out on the last day of term. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione had passed every subject. 
Harry was amazed that he had got through Potions. 
He had a shrewd suspicion that Dumbledore might 
have stepped in to stop Snape failing him on purpose. 
Snape’s behavior toward Harry over the past week 
had been quite alarming. Harry wouldn’t have 
thought it possible that Snape’s dislike for him could 
increase, but it certainly had. A muscle twitched 
unpleasantly at the corner of Snape’s thin mouth 
every time he looked at Harry, and he was constantly 
flexing his fingers, as though itching to place them 
around Harry’s throat. 

Percy had got his top-grade N.E.W.T.s; Fred and 
George had scraped a handful of O.W.L.s each. 
Gryffindor House, meanwhile, largely thanks to their 
spectacular performance in the Quidditch Cup, had 
won the House championship for the third year 
running. This meant that the end of term feast took 
place amid decorations of scarlet and gold, and that 
the Gryffindor table was the noisiest of the lot, as 
everybody celebrated. Even Harry managed to forget 



Page | 481 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




about the journey back to the Dursleys the next day 
as he ate, drank, talked, and laughed with the rest. 



As the Hogwarts Express pulled out of the station the 
next morning, Hermione gave Harry and Ron some 
surprising news. 

“I went to see Professor McGonagall this morning, just 
before breakfast. I’ve decided to drop Muggle Studies.” 

“But you passed your exam with three hundred and 
twenty percent!” said Ron. 

“I know,” sighed Hermione, “but I can’t stand another 
year like this one. That Time-Turner, it was driving 
me mad. I’ve handed it in. Without Muggle Studies 
and Divination, I’ll be able to have a normal schedule 
again.” 

“I still can’t believe you didn’t tell us about it,” said 
Ron grumpily. “We’re supposed to be your friends.” 

“I promised I wouldn’t tell anyone,” said Hermione 
severely. She looked around at Harry, who was 
watching Hogwarts disappear from view behind a 
mountain. Two whole months before he’d see it again. 



“Oh, cheer up, Harry!” said Hermione sadly. 

“I’m okay,” said Harry quickly. “Just thinking about 
the holidays.” 

“Yeah, I’ve been thinking about them too,” said Ron. 
“Harry, you’ve got to come and stay with us. I’ll fix it 
up with Mum and Dad, then I’ll call you. I know how 
to use a fellytone now — ” 

Page | 482 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“A telephone, Ron,” said Hermione. “Honestly, you 
should take Muggle Studies next year. ...” 

Ron ignored her. 

“It’s the Quidditch World Cup this summer! How 
about it, Harry? Come and stay, and we’ll go and see 
it! Dad can usually get tickets from work.” 

This proposal had the effect of cheering Harry up a 
great deal. 

“Yeah ... I bet the Dursleys’d be pleased to let me 
come ... especially after what I did to Aunt Marge. ...” 

Feeling considerably more cheerful, Harry joined Ron 
and Hermione in several games of Exploding Snap, 
and when the witch with the tea cart arrived, he 
bought himself a very large lunch, though nothing 
with chocolate in it. 

But it was late in the afternoon before the thing that 
made him truly happy turned up. ... 

“Harry,” said Hermione suddenly, peering over his 
shoulder. “What’s that thing outside your window?” 

Harry turned to look outside. Something very small 
and gray was bobbing in and out of sight beyond the 
glass. He stood up for a better look and saw that it 
was a tiny owl, carrying a letter that was much too 
big for it. The owl was so small, in fact, that it kept 
tumbling over in the air, buffeted this way and that in 
the train’s slipstream. Harry quickly pulled down the 
window, stretched out his arm, and caught it. It felt 
like a very fluffy Snitch. He brought it carefully inside. 
The owl dropped its letter onto Harry’s seat and began 
zooming around their compartment, apparently very 
pleased with itself for accomplishing its task. Hedwig 
Page | 483 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




clicked her beak with a sort of dignified disapproval. 
Crookshanks sat up in his seat, following the owl with 
his great yellow eyes. Ron, noticing this, snatched the 
owl safely out of harm’s way. 

Harry picked up the letter. It was addressed to him. 

He ripped open the letter, and shouted, “It’s from 
Sirius!” 

“What?” said Ron and Hermione excitedly. “Read it 
aloud!” 

Dear Harry, 

I hope this finds you before you reach your aunt and 
uncle. I don’t know whether they’re used to owl post 

Buckbeak and I are in hiding. I won’t tell you where, in 
case this owl falls into the wrong hands. I have some 
doubt about his reliability, but he is the best I could 
find, and he did seem eager for the job. 

I believe the dementors are still searching for me, but 
they haven’t a hope of finding me here. I am planning 
to allow some Muggles to glimpse me soon, a long way 
from Hogwarts, so that the security on the castle will 
be lifted. 

There is something I never got around to telling you 
during our brief meeting. It was I who sent you the 
Firebolt — 

“Ha!” said Hermione triumphantly. “See! I told you it 
was from him!” 

“Yes, but he hadn’t jinxed it, had he?” said Ron. 
“Ouch!” The tiny owl, now hooting happily in his 
hand, had nibbled one of his fingers in what it 
seemed to think was an affectionate way. 

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Crookshanks took the order to the Owl Office for me. I 
used your name but told them to take the gold from my 
own Gringotts vault. Please consider it as thirteen 
birthdays’ worth of presents from your godfather. 

I would also like to apologize for the fright I think I 
gave you that night last year when you left your 
uncle’s house. I had only hoped to get a glimpse of you 
before starting my journey north, but I think the sight 
of me alarmed you. 

I am enclosing something else for you, which I think 
will make your next year at Hogwarts more enjoyable. 

If ever you need me, send word. Your owl will find me. 

I’ll write again soon. 

Sirius 

Harry looked eagerly inside the envelope. There was 
another piece of parchment in there. He read it 
through quickly and felt suddenly as warm and 
contented as though he’d swallowed a bottle of hot 
butterbeer in one gulp. 

I, Sirius Black, Harry Potter’s godfather, hereby give 
him permission to visit Hogsmeade on weekends. 

“That’ll be good enough for Dumbledore!” said Harry 
happily. He looked back at Sirius’s letter. 

“Hang on, there’s a P.S. ...” 

I thought your friend Ron might like to keep this owl, 
as it’s my fault he no longer has a rat. 

Ron’s eyes widened. The minute owl was still hooting 
excitedly. 

Page | 485 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Keep him?” he said uncertainly. He looked closely at 
the owl for a moment; then, to Harry’s and 
Hermione’s great surprise, he held him out for 
Crookshanks to sniff. 

“What do’you reckon?” Ron asked the cat. “Definitely 
an owl?” 

Crookshanks purred. 

“That’s good enough for me,” said Ron happily. “He’s 
mine.” 

Harry read and reread the letter from Sirius all the 
way back into King’s Cross station. It was still 
clutched tightly in his hand as he, Ron, and 
Hermione stepped back through the barrier of 
platform nine and three-quarters. Harry spotted 
Uncle Vernon at once. He was standing a good 
distance from Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, eyeing them 
suspiciously, and when Mrs. Weasley hugged Harry in 
greeting, his worst suspicions about them seemed 
confirmed. 

“I’ll call about the World Cup!” Ron yelled after Harry 
as Harry bid him and Hermione good-bye, then 
wheeled the trolley bearing his trunk and Hedwig’s 
cage toward Uncle Vernon, who greeted him in his 
usual fashion. 

“What’s that?” he snarled, staring at the envelope 
Harry was still clutching in his hand. “If it’s another 
form for me to sign, you’ve got another — ” 

“It’s not,” said Harry cheerfully. “It’s a letter from my 
godfather.” 

“Godfather?” sputtered Uncle Vernon. “You haven’t 
got a godfather!” 

Page | 486 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, I have,” said Harry brightly. “He was my mum 
and dad’s best friend. He’s a convicted murderer, but 
he’s broken out of wizard prison and he’s on the run. 
He likes to keep in touch with me, though ... keep up 
with my news ... check if I’m happy. ...” 

And, grinning broadly at the look of horror on Uncle 
Vernon’s face, Harry set off toward the station exit, 
Hedwig rattling along in front of him, for what looked 
like a much better summer than the last. 



Page | 487 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



/ 




THE RIDDLE HOUSE 

The villagers of Little Hangleton still called it “the 
Riddle House,” even though it had been many years 
since the Riddle family had lived there. It stood on a 
hill overlooking the village, some of its windows 
boarded, tiles missing from its roof, and ivy spreading 
unchecked over its face. Once a fine-looking manor, 
and easily the largest and grandest building for miles 
around, the Riddle House was now damp, derelict, 
and unoccupied. 

The Little Hangletons all agreed that the old house 
was “creepy.” Half a century ago, something strange 
and horrible had happened there, something that the 
older inhabitants of the village still liked to discuss 
when topics for gossip were scarce. The story had 
been picked over so many times, and had been 
embroidered in so many places, that nobody was 
quite sure what the truth was anymore. Every version 
of the tale, however, started in the same place: Fifty 
years before, at daybreak on a fine summer’s 
morning, when the Riddle House had still been well 



Page | 2 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



kept and impressive, a maid had entered the drawing 
room to find all three Riddles dead. 

The maid had run screaming down the hill into the 
village and roused as many people as she could. 

“Lying there with their eyes wide open! Cold as ice! 
Still in their dinner things!” 

The police were summoned, and the whole of Little 
Hangleton had seethed with shocked curiosity and ill- 
disguised excitement. Nobody wasted their breath 
pretending to feel very sad about the Riddles, for they 
had been most unpopular. Elderly Mr. and Mrs. 
Riddle had been rich, snobbish, and rude, and their 
grown-up son, Tom, had been, if anything, worse. All 
the villagers cared about was the identity of their 
murderer — for plainly, three apparently healthy 
people did not all drop dead of natural causes on the 
same night. 

The Hanged Man, the village pub, did a roaring trade 
that night; the whole village seemed to have turned 
out to discuss the murders. They were rewarded for 
leaving their firesides when the Riddles’ cook arrived 
dramatically in their midst and announced to the 
suddenly silent pub that a man called Frank Bryce 
had just been arrested. 

“Frank!” cried several people. “Never!” 

Frank Bryce was the Riddles’ gardener. He lived alone 
in a rundown cottage on the grounds of the Riddle 
House. Frank had come back from the war with a 
very stiff leg and a great dislike of crowds and loud 
noises, and had been working for the Riddles ever 
since. 



Page | 3 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




There was a rush to buy the cook drinks and hear 
more details. 



“Always thought he was odd,” she told the eagerly 
listening villagers, after her fourth sherry. 

“Unfriendly, like. I’m sure if I’ve offered him a cuppa 
once, I’ve offered it a hundred times. Never wanted to 
mix, he didn’t.” 

“Ah, now,” said a woman at the bar, “he had a hard 
war, Frank. He likes the quiet life. That’s no reason to 



“Who else had a key to the back door, then?” barked 
the cook. “There’s been a spare key hanging in the 
gardener’s cottage far back as I can remember! 
Nobody forced the door last night! No broken 
windows! All Frank had to do was creep up to the big 
house while we was all sleeping. ...” 

The villagers exchanged dark looks. 

“I always thought he had a nasty look about him, 
right enough,” grunted a man at the bar. 

“War turned him funny, if you ask me,” said the 
landlord. 

“Told you I wouldn’t like to get on the wrong side of 
Frank, didn’t I, Dot?” said an excited woman in the 
corner. 

“Horrible temper,” said Dot, nodding fervently. “I 
remember, when he was a kid ...” 

By the following morning, hardly anyone in Little 
Hangleton doubted that Frank Bryce had killed the 
Riddles. 



Page | 4 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But over in the neighboring town of Great Hangleton, 
in the dark and dingy police station, Frank was 
stubbornly repeating, again and again, that he was 
innocent, and that the only person he had seen near 
the house on the day of the Riddles’ deaths had been 
a teenage boy, a stranger, dark-haired and pale. 
Nobody else in the village had seen any such boy, and 
the police were quite sure that Frank had invented 
him. 

Then, just when things were looking very serious for 
Frank, the report on the Riddles’ bodies came back 
and changed everything. 

The police had never read an odder report. A team of 
doctors had examined the bodies and had concluded 
that none of the Riddles had been poisoned, stabbed, 
shot, strangled, suffocated, or (as far as they could 
tell) harmed at all. In fact (the report continued, in a 
tone of unmistakable bewilderment), the Riddles all 
appeared to be in perfect health — apart from the fact 
that they were all dead. The doctors did note (as 
though determined to find something wrong with the 
bodies) that each of the Riddles had a look of terror 
upon his or her face — but as the frustrated police 
said, whoever heard of three people being frightened 
to death? 

As there was no proof that the Riddles had been 
murdered at all, the police were forced to let Frank go. 
The Riddles were buried in the Little Hangleton 
churchyard, and their graves remained objects of 
curiosity for a while. To everyone’s surprise, and amid 
a cloud of suspicion, Frank Bryce returned to his 
cottage on the grounds of the Riddle House. 

“ ’S far as I’m concerned, he killed them, and I don’t 
care what the police say,” said Dot in the Hanged 



Page | 5 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Man. “And if he had any decency, he’d leave here, 
knowing as how we knows he did it.” 

But Frank did not leave. He stayed to tend the garden 
for the next family who lived in the Riddle House, and 
then the next — for neither family stayed long. 

Perhaps it was partly because of Frank that the new 
owners said there was a nasty feeling about the place, 
which, in the absence of inhabitants, started to fall 
into disrepair. 

The wealthy man who owned the Riddle House these 
days neither lived there nor put it to any use; they 
said in the village that he kept it for “tax reasons,” 
though nobody was very clear what these might be. 
The wealthy owner continued to pay Frank to do the 
gardening, however. Frank was nearing his seventy- 
seventh birthday now, very deaf, his bad leg stiffer 
than ever, but could be seen pottering around the 
flower beds in fine weather, even though the weeds 
were starting to creep up on him, try as he might to 
suppress them. 

Weeds were not the only things Frank had to contend 
with either. Boys from the village made a habit of 
throwing stones through the windows of the Riddle 
House. They rode their bicycles over the lawns Frank 
worked so hard to keep smooth. Once or twice, they 
broke into the old house for a dare. They knew that 
old Frank’s devotion to the house and grounds 
amounted almost to an obsession, and it amused 
them to see him limping across the garden, 
brandishing his stick and yelling croakily at them. 
Frank, for his part, believed the boys tormented him 
because they, like their parents and grandparents, 
thought him a murderer. So when Frank awoke one 
night in August and saw something very odd up at 
the old house, he merely assumed that the boys had 
gone one step further in their attempts to punish him. 
Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




It was Frank’s bad leg that woke him; it was paining 
him worse than ever in his old age. He got up and 
limped downstairs into the kitchen with the idea of 
refilling his hot-water bottle to ease the stiffness in 
his knee. Standing at the sink, filling the kettle, he 
looked up at the Riddle House and saw lights 
glimmering in its upper windows. Frank knew at once 
what was going on. The boys had broken into the 
house again, and judging by the flickering quality of 
the light, they had started a fire. 

Frank had no telephone, and in any case, he had 
deeply mistrusted the police ever since they had 
taken him in for questioning about the Riddles’ 
deaths. He put down the kettle at once, hurried back 
upstairs as fast as his bad leg would allow, and was 
soon back in his kitchen, fully dressed and removing 
a rusty old key from its hook by the door. He picked 
up his walking stick, which was propped against the 
wall, and set off into the night. 

The front door of the Riddle House bore no sign of 
being forced, nor did any of the windows. Frank 
limped around to the back of the house until he 
reached a door almost completely hidden by ivy, took 
out the old key, put it into the lock, and opened the 
door noiselessly. 

He let himself into the cavernous kitchen. Frank had 
not entered it for many years; nevertheless, although 
it was very dark, he remembered where the door into 
the hall was, and he groped his way toward it, his 
nostrils full of the smell of decay, ears pricked for any 
sound of footsteps or voices from overhead. He 
reached the hall, which was a little lighter owing to 
the large mullioned windows on either side of the 
front door, and started to climb the stairs, blessing 
the dust that lay thick upon the stone, because it 
muffled the sound of his feet and stick. 

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




On the landing, Frank turned right, and saw at once 
where the intruders were: At the very end of the 
passage a door stood ajar, and a flickering light shone 
through the gap, casting a long sliver of gold across 
the black floor. Frank edged closer and closer, 
grasping his walking stick firmly. Several feet from 
the entrance, he was able to see a narrow slice of the 
room beyond. 

The fire, he now saw, had been lit in the grate. This 
surprised him. Then he stopped moving and listened 
intently, for a man’s voice spoke within the room; it 
sounded timid and fearful. 

“There is a little more in the bottle, My Lord, if you 
are still hungry.” 

“Later,” said a second voice. This too belonged to a 
man — but it was strangely high-pitched, and cold as 
a sudden blast of icy wind. Something about that 
voice made the sparse hairs on the back of Frank’s 
neck stand up. “Move me closer to the fire, Wormtail.” 

Frank turned his right ear toward the door, the better 
to hear. There came the clink of a bottle being put 
down upon some hard surface, and then the dull 
scraping noise of a heavy chair being dragged across 
the floor. Frank caught a glimpse of a small man, his 
back to the door, pushing the chair into place. He was 
wearing a long black cloak, and there was a bald 
patch at the back of his head. Then he went out of 
sight again. 

“Where is Nagini?” said the cold voice. 

“I — I don’t know, My Lord,” said the first voice 
nervously. “She set out to explore the house, I think. 



Page | 8 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You will milk her before we retire, Wormtail,” said 
the second voice. “I will need feeding in the night. The 
journey has tired me greatly.” 

Brow furrowed, Frank inclined his good ear still closer 
to the door, listening very hard. There was a pause, 
and then the man called Wormtail spoke again. 

“My Lord, may I ask how long we are going to stay 
here?” 

“A week,” said the cold voice. “Perhaps longer. The 
place is moderately comfortable, and the plan cannot 
proceed yet. It would be foolish to act before the 
Quidditch World Cup is over.” 

Frank inserted a gnarled finger into his ear and 
rotated it. Owing, no doubt, to a buildup of earwax, 
he had heard the word “Quidditch,” which was not a 
word at all. 

“The — the Quidditch World Cup, My Lord?” said 
Wormtail. (Frank dug his finger still more vigorously 
into his ear.) “Forgive me, but — I do not understand 
— why should we wait until the World Cup is over?” 

“Because, fool, at this very moment wizards are 
pouring into the country from all over the world, and 
every meddler from the Ministry of Magic will be on 
duty, on the watch for signs of unusual activity, 
checking and double-checking identities. They will be 
obsessed with security, lest the Muggles notice 
anything. So we wait.” 

Frank stopped trying to clear out his ear. He had 
distinctly heard the words “Ministry of Magic,” 
“wizards,” and “Muggles.” Plainly, each of these 
expressions meant something secret, and Frank could 
think of only two sorts of people who would speak in 
Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




code: spies and criminals. Frank tightened his hold 
on his walking stick once more, and listened more 
closely still. 

“Your Lordship is still determined, then?” Wormtail 
said quietly. 

“Certainly I am determined, Wormtail.” There was a 
note of menace in the cold voice now. 

A slight pause followed — and then Wormtail spoke, 
the words tumbling from him in a rush, as though he 
was forcing himself to say this before he lost his 
nerve. 

“It could be done without Harry Potter, My Lord.” 

Another pause, more protracted, and then — 

“Without Harry Potter?” breathed the second voice 
softly. “I see ...” 

“My Lord, I do not say this out of concern for the boy!” 
said Wormtail, his voice rising squeakily. “The boy is 
nothing to me, nothing at all! It is merely that if we 
were to use another witch or wizard — any wizard — 
the thing could be done so much more quickly! If you 
allowed me to leave you for a short while — you know 
that I can disguise myself most effectively — I could 
be back here in as little as two days with a suitable 
person — ” 

“I could use another wizard,” said the cold voice 
softly, “that is true. ...” 

“My Lord, it makes sense,” said Wormtail, sounding 
thoroughly relieved now. “Laying hands on Harry 
Potter would be so difficult, he is so well protected — ” 



Page | 10 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And so you volunteer to go and fetch me a 
substitute? I wonder . . . perhaps the task of nursing 
me has become wearisome for you, “Wormtail? Could 
this suggestion of abandoning the plan be nothing 
more than an attempt to desert me?” 

“My Lord! I — I have no wish to leave you, none at all 



“Do not lie to me!” hissed the second voice. “I can 
always tell, Wormtail! You are regretting that you ever 
returned to me. I revolt you. I see you flinch when you 
look at me, feel you shudder when you touch me. ...” 

“No! My devotion to Your Lordship — ” 

“Your devotion is nothing more than cowardice. You 
would not be here if you had anywhere else to go. 

How am I to survive without you, when I need feeding 
every few hours? Who is to milk Nagini?” 

“But you seem so much stronger, My Lord — ” 

“Liar,” breathed the second voice. “I am no stronger, 
and a few days alone would be enough to rob me of 
the little health I have regained under your clumsy 
care. Silencel” 

Wormtail, who had been sputtering incoherently, fell 
silent at once. For a few seconds, Frank could hear 
nothing but the fire crackling. Then the second man 
spoke once more, in a whisper that was almost a hiss. 

“I have my reasons for using the boy, as I have 
already explained to you, and I will use no other. I 
have waited thirteen years. A few more months will 
make no difference. As for the protection surrounding 
the boy, I believe my plan will be effective. All that is 
needed is a little courage from you, Wormtail — 

Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




courage you will find, unless you wish to feel the full 
extent of Lord Voldemort’s wrath — ” 

“My Lord, I must speak!” said Wormtail, panic in his 
voice now. “All through our journey I have gone over 
the plan in my head — My Lord, Bertha Jorkins’s 
disappearance will not go unnoticed for long, and if 
we proceed, if I murder — ” 

“IP” whispered the second voice. “If? If you follow the 
plan, Wormtail, the Ministry need never know that 
anyone else has died. You will do it quietly and 
without fuss; I only wish that I could do it myself, but 
in my present condition ... Come, Wormtail, one more 
death and our path to Harry Potter is clear. I am not 
asking you to do it alone. By that time, my faithful 
servant will have rejoined us — ” 

“I am a faithful servant,” said Wormtail, the merest 
trace of sullenness in his voice. 

“Wormtail, I need somebody with brains, somebody 
whose loyalty has never wavered, and you, 
unfortunately, fulfill neither requirement.” 

“I found you,” said Wormtail, and there was definitely 
a sulky edge to his voice now. “I was the one who 
found you. I brought you Bertha Jorkins.” 

“That is true,” said the second man, sounding 
amused. “A stroke of brilliance I would not have 
thought possible from you, Wormtail — though, if 
truth be told, you were not aware how useful she 
would be when you caught her, were you?” 

“I — I thought she might be useful, My Lord — ” 

“Liar,” said the second voice again, the cruel 
amusement more pronounced than ever. “However, I 

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




do not deny that her information was invaluable. 
Without it, I could never have formed our plan, and 
for that, you will have your reward, Wormtail. I will 
allow you to perform an essential task for me, one 
that many of my followers would give their right 
hands to perform. ...” 

“R-really, My Lord? What — ?” Wormtail sounded 
terrified again. 

“Ah, Wormtail, you don’t want me to spoil the 
surprise? Your part will come at the very end ... but I 
promise you, you will have the honor of being just as 
useful as Bertha Jorkins.” 

“You ... you ...” Wormtail’s voice suddenly sounded 
hoarse, as though his mouth had gone very dry. “You 
. . . are going ... to kill me too?” 

“Wormtail, Wormtail,” said the cold voice silkily, “why 
would I kill you? I killed Bertha because I had to. She 
was fit for nothing after my questioning, quite 
useless. In any case, awkward questions would have 
been asked if she had gone back to the Ministry with 
the news that she had met you on her holidays. 
Wizards who are supposed to be dead would do well 
not to run into Ministry of Magic witches at wayside 
inns. ...” 

Wormtail muttered something so quietly that Frank 
could not hear it, but it made the second man laugh 
— an entirely mirthless laugh, cold as his speech. 

“We could have modified her memory? But Memory 
Charms can be broken by a powerful wizard, as I 
proved when I questioned her. It would be an insult to 
her memory not to use the information I extracted 
from her, Wormtail.” 



Page | 13 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Out in the corridor, Frank suddenly became aware 
that the hand gripping his walking stick was slippery 
with sweat. The man with the cold voice had killed a 
woman. He was talking about it without any kind of 
remorse — with amusement. He was dangerous — a 
madman. And he was planning more murders — this 
boy, Harry Potter, whoever he was — was in danger — 

Frank knew what he must do. Now, if ever, was the 
time to go to the police. He would creep out of the 
house and head straight for the telephone box in the 
village . . . but the cold voice was speaking again, and 
Frank remained where he was, frozen to the spot, 
listening with all his might. 

“One more murder . . . my faithful servant at Hogwarts 
... Harry Potter is as good as mine, Wormtail. It is 
decided. There will be no more argument. But quiet ... 
I think I hear Nagini. ...” 

And the second man’s voice changed. He started 
making noises such as Frank had never heard before; 
he was hissing and spitting without drawing breath. 
Frank thought he must be having some sort of fit or 
seizure. 

And then Frank heard movement behind him in the 
dark passageway. He turned to look, and found 
himself paralyzed with fright. 

Something was slithering toward him along the dark 
corridor floor, and as it drew nearer to the sliver of 
firelight, he realized with a thrill of terror that it was a 
gigantic snake, at least twelve feet long. Horrified, 
transfixed, Frank stared as its undulating body cut a 
wide, curving track through the thick dust on the 
floor, coming closer and closer — What was he to do? 
The only means of escape was into the room where 



Page | 14 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




two men sat plotting murder, yet if he stayed where 
he was the snake would surely kill him — 

But before he had made his decision, the snake was 
level with him, and then, incredibly, miraculously, it 
was passing; it was following the spitting, hissing 
noises made by the cold voice beyond the door, and in 
seconds, the tip of its diamond-patterned tail had 
vanished through the gap. 

There was sweat on Frank’s forehead now, and the 
hand on the walking stick was trembling. Inside the 
room, the cold voice was continuing to hiss, and 
Frank was visited by a strange idea, an impossible 
idea. . . . This man could talk to snakes. 

Frank didn’t understand what was going on. He 
wanted more than anything to be back in his bed with 
his hot-water bottle. The problem was that his legs 
didn’t seem to want to move. As he stood there 
shaking and trying to master himself, the cold voice 
switched abruptly to English again. 

“Nagini has interesting news, Wormtail,” it said. 

“In-indeed, My Lord?” said Wormtail. 

“Indeed, yes,” said the voice. “According to Nagini, 
there is an old Muggle standing right outside this 
room, listening to every word we say.” 

Frank didn’t have a chance to hide himself. There 
were footsteps, and then the door of the room was 
flung wide open. 

A short, balding man with graying hair, a pointed 
nose, and small, watery eyes stood before Frank, a 
mixture of fear and alarm in his face. 



Page | 15 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Invite him inside, Wormtail. Where are your 
manners?” 

The cold voice was coming from the ancient armchair 
before the fire, but Frank couldn’t see the speaker. 
The snake, on the other hand, was curled up on the 
rotting hearth rug, like some horrible travesty of a pet 
dog. 

Wormtail beckoned Frank into the room. Though still 
deeply shaken, Frank took a firmer grip upon his 
walking stick and limped over the threshold. 

The fire was the only source of light in the room; it 
cast long, spidery shadows upon the walls. Frank 
stared at the back of the armchair; the man inside it 
seemed to be even smaller than his servant, for Frank 
couldn’t even see the back of his head. 

“You heard everything, Muggle?” said the cold voice. 

“What’s that you’re calling me?” said Frank defiantly, 
for now that he was inside the room, now that the 
time had come for some sort of action, he felt braver; 
it had always been so in the war. 

“I am calling you a Muggle,” said the voice coolly. “It 
means that you are not a wizard.” 

“I don’t know what you mean by wizard,” said Frank, 
his voice growing steadier. “All I know is I’ve heard 
enough to interest the police tonight, I have. You’ve 
done murder and you’re planning more! And I’ll tell 
you this too,” he added, on a sudden inspiration, “my 
wife knows I’m up here, and if I don’t come back — ” 

“You have no wife,” said the cold voice, very quietly. 
“Nobody knows you are here. You told nobody that 



Page | 16 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you were coming. Do not lie to Lord Voldemort, 
Muggle, for he knows ... he always knows. ...” 

“Is that right?” said Frank roughly. “Lord, is it? Well, I 
don’t think much of your manners, My Lord. Turn 
’round and face me like a man, why don’t you?” 

“But I am not a man, Muggle,” said the cold voice, 
barely audible now over the crackling of the flames. “I 
am much, much more than a man. However ... why 
not? I will face you. ... Wormtail, come turn my chair 
around.” 

The servant gave a whimper. 

“You heard me, Wormtail.” 

Slowly, with his face screwed up, as though he would 
rather have done anything than approach his master 
and the hearth rug where the snake lay, the small 
man walked forward and began to turn the chair. The 
snake lifted its ugly triangular head and hissed 
slightly as the legs of the chair snagged on its rug. 

And then the chair was facing Frank, and he saw 
what was sitting in it. His walking stick fell to the 
floor with a clatter. He opened his mouth and let out 
a scream. He was screaming so loudly that he never 
heard the words the thing in the chair spoke as it 
raised a wand. There was a flash of green light, a 
rushing sound, and Frank Bryce crumpled. He was 
dead before he hit the floor. 

Two hundred miles away, the boy called Harry Potter 
woke with a start. 



Page | 17 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE SCAR 

Harry lay flat on his back, breathing hard as though 
he had been running. He had awoken from a vivid 
dream with his hands pressed over his face. The old 
scar on his forehead, which was shaped like a bolt of 
lightning, was burning beneath his fingers as though 
someone had just pressed a white-hot wire to his 
skin. 

He sat up, one hand still on his scar, the other 
reaching out in the darkness for his glasses, which 
were on the bedside table. He put them on and his 
bedroom came into clearer focus, lit by a faint, misty 
orange light that was filtering through the curtains 
from the street lamp outside the window. 

Harry ran his fingers over the scar again. It was still 
painful. He turned on the lamp beside him, scrambled 
out of bed, crossed the room, opened his wardrobe, 
and peered into the mirror on the inside of the door. A 
skinny boy of fourteen looked back at him, his bright 
green eyes puzzled under his untidy black hair. He 



Page | 18 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



examined the lightning-bolt scar of his reflection more 
closely. It looked normal, but it was still stinging. 

Harry tried to recall what he had been dreaming 
about before he had awoken. It had seemed so real. ... 
There had been two people he knew and one he 
didn’t. ... He concentrated hard, frowning, trying to 
remember. ... 

The dim picture of a darkened room came to him. ... 
There had been a snake on a hearth rug ... a small 
man called Peter, nicknamed Wormtail ... and a cold, 
high voice ... the voice of Lord Voldemort. Harry felt 
as though an ice cube had slipped down into his 
stomach at the very thought. ... 

He closed his eyes tightly and tried to remember what 
Voldemort had looked like, but it was impossible. ... 
All Harry knew was that at the moment when 
Voldemort’s chair had swung around, and he, Harry, 
had seen what was sitting in it, he had felt a spasm of 
horror, which had awoken him ... or had that been 
the pain in his scar? 

And who had the old man been? For there had 
definitely been an old man; Harry had watched him 
fall to the ground. It was all becoming confused. 

Harry put his face into his hands, blocking out his 
bedroom, trying to hold on to the picture of that dimly 
lit room, but it was like trying to keep water in his 
cupped hands; the details were now trickling away as 
fast as he tried to hold on to them. ... Voldemort and 
Wormtail had been talking about someone they had 
killed, though Harry could not remember the name . . . 
and they had been plotting to kill someone else . . . 
him). 

Harry took his face out of his hands, opened his eyes, 
and stared around his bedroom as though expecting 

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




to see something unusual there. As it happened, 
there were an extraordinary number of unusual 
things in this room. A large wooden trunk stood open 
at the foot of his bed, revealing a cauldron, 
broomstick, black robes, and assorted spellbooks. 
Rolls of parchment littered that part of his desk that 
was not taken up by the large, empty cage in which 
his snowy owl, Hedwig, usually perched. On the floor 
beside his bed a book lay open; Harry had been 
reading it before he fell asleep last night. The pictures 
in this book were all moving. Men in bright orange 
robes were zooming in and out of sight on 
broomsticks, throwing a red ball to one another. 

Harry walked over to the book, picked it up, and 
watched one of the wizards score a spectacular goal 
by putting the ball through a fifty-foot-high hoop. 

Then he snapped the book shut. Even Quidditch — in 
Harry’s opinion, the best sport in the world — 
couldn’t distract him at the moment. He placed Flying 
with the Cannons on his bedside table, crossed to the 
window, and drew back the curtains to survey the 
street below. 

Privet Drive looked exactly as a respectable suburban 
street would be expected to look in the early hours of 
Saturday morning. All the curtains were closed. As far 
as Harry could see through the darkness, there 
wasn’t a living creature in sight, not even a cat. 

And yet . . . and yet . . . Harry went restlessly back to 
the bed and sat down on it, running a finger over his 
scar again. It wasn’t the pain that bothered him; 

Harry was no stranger to pain and injury. He had lost 
all the bones from his right arm once and had them 
painfully regrown in a night. The same arm had been 
pierced by a venomous foot-long fang not long 
afterward. Only last year Harry had fallen fifty feet 
from an airborne broomstick. He was used to bizarre 
Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




accidents and injuries; they were unavoidable if you 
attended Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry 
and had a knack for attracting a lot of trouble. 

No, the thing that was bothering Harry was that the 
last time his scar had hurt him, it had been because 
Voldemort had been close by. ... But Voldemort 
couldn’t be here, now. ... The idea of Voldemort 
lurking in Privet Drive was absurd, impossible. ... 

Harry listened closely to the silence around him. Was 
he half-expecting to hear the creak of a stair or the 
swish of a cloak? And then he jumped slightly as he 
heard his cousin Dudley give a tremendous grunting 
snore from the next room. 

Harry shook himself mentally; he was being stupid. 
There was no one in the house with him except Uncle 
Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley, and they were 
plainly still asleep, their dreams untroubled and 
painless. 

Asleep was the way Harry liked the Dursleys best; it 
wasn’t as though they were ever any help to him 
awake. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley were 
Harry’s only living relatives. They were Muggles who 
hated and despised magic in any form, which meant 
that Harry was about as welcome in their house as 
dry rot. They had explained away Harry’s long 
absences at Hogwarts over the last three years by 
telling everyone that he went to St. Brutus’s Secure 
Center for Incurably Criminal Boys. They knew 
perfectly well that, as an underage wizard, Harry 
wasn’t allowed to use magic outside Hogwarts, but 
they were still apt to blame him for anything that 
went wrong about the house. Harry had never been 
able to confide in them or tell them anything about 
his life in the wizarding world. The very idea of going 
to them when they awoke, and telling them about his 
Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




scar hurting him, and about his worries about 
Voldemort, was laughable. 

And yet it was because of Voldemort that Harry had 
come to live with the Dursleys in the first place. If it 
hadn’t been for Voldemort, Harry would not have had 
the lightning scar on his forehead. If it hadn’t been for 
Voldemort, Harry would still have had parents. ... 

Harry had been a year old the night that Voldemort — 
the most powerful Dark wizard for a century, a wizard 
who had been gaining power steadily for eleven years 
— arrived at his house and killed his father and 
mother. Voldemort had then turned his wand on 
Harry; he had performed the curse that had disposed 
of many full-grown witches and wizards in his steady 
rise to power — and, incredibly, it had not worked. 
Instead of killing the small boy, the curse had 
rebounded upon Voldemort. Harry had survived with 
nothing but a lightning-shaped cut on his forehead, 
and Voldemort had been reduced to something barely 
alive. His powers gone, his life almost extinguished, 
Voldemort had fled; the terror in which the secret 
community of witches and wizards had lived for so 
long had lifted, Voldemort’s followers had disbanded, 
and Harry Potter had become famous. 

It had been enough of a shock for Harry to discover, 
on his eleventh birthday, that he was a wizard; it had 
been even more disconcerting to find out that 
everyone in the hidden wizarding world knew his 
name. Harry had arrived at Hogwarts to find that 
heads turned and whispers followed him wherever he 
went. But he was used to it now: At the end of this 
summer, he would be starting his fourth year at 
Hogwarts, and Harry was already counting the days 
until he would be back at the castle again. 



Page | 22 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But there was still a fortnight to go before he went 
back to school. He looked hopelessly around his room 
again, and his eye paused on the birthday cards his 
two best friends had sent him at the end of July. 

What would they say if Harry wrote to them and told 
them about his scar hurting? 

At once, Hermione Granger’s voice seemed to fill his 
head, shrill and panicky. 

“ Your scar hurt? Harry, that’s really serious. . . . Write 
to Professor Dumbledorel And I’ll go and check 
Common Magical Ailments and Afflictions. ... Maybe 
there’s something in there about curse scars. ...” 

Yes, that would be Hermione’s advice: Go straight to 
the headmaster of Hogwarts, and in the meantime, 
consult a book. Harry stared out of the window at the 
inky blue-black sky. He doubted very much whether a 
book could help him now. As far as he knew, he was 
the only living person to have survived a curse like 
Voldemort’s; it was highly unlikely, therefore, that he 
would find his symptoms listed in Common Magical 
Ailments and Afflictions. As for informing the 
headmaster, Harry had no idea where Dumbledore 
went during the summer holidays. He amused himself 
for a moment, picturing Dumbledore, with his long 
silver beard, full-length wizard’s robes, and pointed 
hat, stretched out on a beach somewhere, rubbing 
suntan lotion onto his long crooked nose. Wherever 
Dumbledore was, though, Harry was sure that 
Hedwig would be able to find him; Harry’s owl had 
never yet failed to deliver a letter to anyone, even 
without an address. But what would he write? 

Dear Professor Dumbledore, Sorry to bother you, but 
my scar hurt this morning. Yours sincerely, Harry 
Potter. 



Page | 23 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Even inside his head the words sounded stupid. 

And so he tried to imagine his other best friend, Ron 
Weasley’s, reaction, and in a moment, Ron’s red hair 
and long-nosed, freckled face seemed to swim before 
Harry, wearing a bemused expression. 

“ Your scar hurt? But ... but You-Knotu-Who can’t be 
near you now, can he? I mean ... you’d know, wouldn’t 
you? He’d be trying to do you in again, wouldn’t he? I 
dunno, Harry, maybe curse scars always twinge a bit 
... I’ll ask Dad. ...” 

Mr. Weasley was a fully qualified wizard who worked 
in the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office at the 
Ministry of Magic, but he didn’t have any particular 
expertise in the matter of curses, as far as Harry 
knew. In any case, Harry didn’t like the idea of the 
whole Weasley family knowing that he, Harry, was 
getting jumpy about a few moments’ pain. Mrs. 
Weasley would fuss worse than Hermione, and Fred 
and George, Ron’s sixteen-year-old twin brothers, 
might think Harry was losing his nerve. The Weasleys 
were Harry’s favorite family in the world; he was 
hoping that they might invite him to stay any time 
now (Ron had mentioned something about the 
Quidditch World Cup), and he somehow didn’t want 
his visit punctuated with anxious inquiries about his 
scar. 

Harry kneaded his forehead with his knuckles. What 
he really wanted (and it felt almost shameful to admit 
it to himself) was someone like — someone like a 
parent: an adult wizard whose advice he could ask 
without feeling stupid, someone who cared about 
him, who had had experience with Dark Magic. ... 



Page | 24 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And then the solution came to him. It was so simple, 
and so obvious, that he couldn’t believe it had taken 
so long — Sirius. 

Harry leapt up from the bed, hurried across the room, 
and sat down at his desk; he pulled a piece of 
parchment toward him, loaded his eagle-feather quill 
with ink, wrote Dear Sirius, then paused, wondering 
how best to phrase his problem, still marveling at the 
fact that he hadn’t thought of Sirius straight away. 

But then, perhaps it wasn’t so surprising — after all, 
he had only found out that Sirius was his godfather 
two months ago. 

There was a simple reason for Sirius’s complete 
absence from Harry’s life until then — Sirius had 
been in Azkaban, the terrifying wizard jail guarded by 
creatures called dementors, sightless, soul-sucking 
fiends who had come to search for Sirius at Hogwarts 
when he had escaped. Yet Sirius had been innocent 
— the murders for which he had been convicted had 
been committed by Wormtail, Voldemort’s supporter, 
whom nearly everybody now believed dead. Harry, 

Ron, and Hermione knew otherwise, however; they 
had come face-to-face with Wormtail only the 
previous year, though only Professor Dumbledore had 
believed their story. 

For one glorious hour, Harry had believed that he was 
leaving the Dursleys at last, because Sirius had 
offered him a home once his name had been cleared. 
But the chance had been snatched away from him — 
Wormtail had escaped before they could take him to 
the Ministry of Magic, and Sirius had had to flee for 
his life. Harry had helped him escape on the back of a 
hippogriff called Buckbeak, and since then, Sirius 
had been on the run. The home Harry might have had 
if Wormtail had not escaped had been haunting him 
all summer. It had been doubly hard to return to the 
Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dursleys knowing that he had so nearly escaped them 
forever. 

Nevertheless, Sirius had been of some help to Harry, 
even if he couldn’t be with him. It was due to Sirius 
that Harry now had all his school things in his 
bedroom with him. The Dursleys had never allowed 
this before; their general wish of keeping Harry as 
miserable as possible, coupled with their fear of his 
powers, had led them to lock his school trunk in the 
cupboard under the stairs every summer prior to this. 
But their attitude had changed since they had found 
out that Harry had a dangerous murderer for a 
godfather — for Harry had conveniently forgotten to 
tell them that Sirius was innocent. 

Harry had received two letters from Sirius since he 
had been back at Privet Drive. Both had been 
delivered, not by owls (as was usual with wizards), 
but by large, brightly colored tropical birds. Hedwig 
had not approved of these flashy intruders; she had 
been most reluctant to allow them to drink from her 
water tray before flying off again. Harry, on the other 
hand, had liked them; they put him in mind of palm 
trees and white sand, and he hoped that, wherever 
Sirius was (Sirius never said, in case the letters were 
intercepted), he was enjoying himself. Somehow, 

Harry found it hard to imagine dementors surviving 
for long in bright sunlight; perhaps that was why 
Sirius had gone south. Sirius’s letters, which were 
now hidden beneath the highly useful loose 
floorboard under Harry’s bed, sounded cheerful, and 
in both of them he had reminded Harry to call on him 
if ever Harry needed to. Well, he needed to now, all 
right. ... 

Harry’s lamp seemed to grow dimmer as the cold gray 
light that precedes sunrise slowly crept into the room. 
Finally, when the sun had risen, when his bedroom 

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




walls had turned gold, and when sounds of movement 
could be heard from Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia’s 
room, Harry cleared his desk of crumpled pieces of 
parchment and reread his finished letter. 

Dear Sirius, 

Thanks for your last letter. That bird was enormous; it 
could hardly get through my window. 

Things are the same as usual here. Dudley’s diet isn’t 
going too well. My aunt found him smuggling 
doughnuts into his room yesterday. They told him 
they ’d have to cut his pocket money if he keeps doing 
it, so he got really angry and chucked his PlayStation 
out of the window. That’s a sort of computer thing you 
can play games on. Bit stupid really, now he hasn’t 
even got Mega-Mutilation Part Three to take his mind 
off things. 

I’m okay, mainly because the Dursleys are terrified 
you might turn up and turn them all into bats if I ask 
you to. 

A weird thing happened this morning, though. My scar 
hurt again. Last time that happened it was because 
Voldemort was at Hogwarts. But I don’t reckon he can 
be anywhere near me now, can he? Do you know if 
curse scars sometimes hurt years afterward? 

I’ll send this with Hedwig when she gets back; she’s 
offhunt-\ing at the moment. Say hello to Buckbeak for 
me. 

Harry 

Yes, thought Harry, that looked all right. There was 
no point putting in the dream; he didn’t want it to 
look as though he was too worried. He folded up the 

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




parchment and laid it aside on his desk, ready for 
when Hedwig returned. Then he got to his feet, 
stretched, and opened his wardrobe once more. 
Without glancing at his reflection, he started to get 
dressed before going down to breakfast. 



Page | 28 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




3 




THE INVITATION 

By the time Harry arrived in the kitchen, the three 
Dursleys were already seated around the table. None 
of them looked up as he entered or sat down. Uncle 
Vernon’s large red face was hidden behind the 
morning’s Daily Mail, and Aunt Petunia was cutting a 
grapefruit into quarters, her lips pursed over her 
horselike teeth. 

Dudley looked furious and sulky, and somehow 
seemed to be taking up even more space than usual. 
This was saying something, as he always took up an 
entire side of the square table by himself. When Aunt 
Petunia put a quarter of unsweetened grapefruit onto 
Dudley’s plate with a tremulous “There you are, Diddy 
darling,” Dudley glowered at her. His life had taken a 
most unpleasant turn since he had come home for 
the summer with his end-of-year report. 

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia had managed to find 
excuses for his bad marks as usual: Aunt Petunia 
always insisted that Dudley was a very gifted boy 
whose teachers didn’t understand him, while Uncle 

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Vernon maintained that “he didn’t want some swotty 
little nancy boy for a son anyway.” They also skated 
over the accusations of bullying in the report — “He’s 
a boisterous little boy, but he wouldn’t hurt a fly!” 
Aunt Petunia had said tearfully. 

However, at the bottom of the report there were a few 
well-chosen comments from the school nurse that not 
even Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia could explain 
away. No matter how much Aunt Petunia wailed that 
Dudley was big-boned, and that his poundage was 
really puppy fat, and that he was a growing boy who 
needed plenty of food, the fact remained that the 
school outfitters didn’t stock knickerbockers big 
enough for him anymore. The school nurse had seen 
what Aunt Petunia’s eyes — so sharp when it came to 
spotting fingerprints on her gleaming walls, and in 
observing the comings and goings of the neighbors — 
simply refused to see: that far from needing extra 
nourishment, Dudley had reached roughly the size 
and weight of a young killer whale. 

So — after many tantrums, after arguments that 
shook Harry’s bedroom floor, and many tears from 
Aunt Petunia — the new regime had begun. The diet 
sheet that had been sent by the Smeltings school 
nurse had been taped to the fridge, which had been 
emptied of all Dudley’s favorite things — fizzy drinks 
and cakes, chocolate bars and burgers — and filled 
instead with fruit and vegetables and the sorts of 
things that Uncle Vernon called “rabbit food.” To 
make Dudley feel better about it all, Aunt Petunia had 
insisted that the whole family follow the diet too. She 
now passed a grapefruit quarter to Harry. He noticed 
that it was a lot smaller than Dudley’s. Aunt Petunia 
seemed to feel that the best way to keep up Dudley’s 
morale was to make sure that he did, at least, get 
more to eat than Harry. 



Page | 30 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But Aunt Petunia didn’t know what was hidden under 
the loose floorboard upstairs. She had no idea that 
Harry was not following the diet at all. The moment 
he had got wind of the fact that he was expected to 
survive the summer on carrot sticks, Harry had sent 
Hedwig to his friends with pleas for help, and they 
had risen to the occasion magnificently. Hedwig had 
returned from Hermione’s house with a large box 
stuffed full of sugar-free snacks. (Hermione’s parents 
were dentists.) Hagrid, the Hogwarts gamekeeper, had 
obliged with a sack full of his own homemade rock 
cakes. (Harry hadn’t touched these; he had had too 
much experience of Hagrid ’s cooking.) Mrs. Weasley, 
however, had sent the family owl, Errol, with an 
enormous fruitcake and assorted meat pies. Poor 
Errol, who was elderly and feeble, had needed a full 
five days to recover from the journey. And then on 
Harry’s birthday (which the Dursleys had completely 
ignored) he had received four superb birthday cakes, 
one each from Ron, Hermione, Hagrid, and Sirius. 
Harry still had two of them left, and so, looking 
forward to a real breakfast when he got back upstairs, 
he ate his grapefruit without complaint. 

Uncle Vernon laid aside his paper with a deep sniff of 
disapproval and looked down at his own grapefruit 
quarter. 

“Is this it?” he said grumpily to Aunt Petunia. 

Aunt Petunia gave him a severe look, and then 
nodded pointedly at Dudley, who had already finished 
his own grapefruit quarter and was eyeing Harry’s 
with a very sour look in his piggy little eyes. 

Uncle Vernon gave a great sigh, which ruffled his 
large, bushy mustache, and picked up his spoon. 



Page | 31 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The doorbell rang. Uncle Vernon heaved himself out 
of his chair and set off down the hall. Quick as a 
flash, while his mother was occupied with the kettle, 
Dudley stole the rest of Uncle Vernon’s grapefruit. 

Harry heard talking at the door, and someone 
laughing, and Uncle Vernon answering curtly. Then 
the front door closed, and the sound of ripping paper 
came from the hall. 

Aunt Petunia set the teapot down on the table and 
looked curiously around to see where Uncle Vernon 
had got to. She didn’t have to wait long to find out; 
after about a minute, he was back. He looked livid. 

“You,” he barked at Harry. “In the living room. Now.” 

Bewildered, wondering what on earth he was 
supposed to have done this time, Harry got up and 
followed Uncle Vernon out of the kitchen and into the 
next room. Uncle Vernon closed the door sharply 
behind both of them. 

“So,” he said, marching over to the fireplace and 
turning to face Harry as though he were about to 
pronounce him under arrest. “So.” 

Harry would have dearly loved to have said, “So 
what?” but he didn’t feel that Uncle Vernon’s temper 
should be tested this early in the morning, especially 
when it was already under severe strain from lack of 
food. He therefore settled for looking politely puzzled. 

“This just arrived,” said Uncle Vernon. He brandished 
a piece of purple writing paper at Harry. “A letter. 
About you.” 



Page | 32 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s confusion increased. Who would be writing to 
Uncle Vernon about him? Who did he know who sent 
letters by the postman? 

Uncle Vernon glared at Harry, then looked down at 
the letter and began to read aloud: 

Dear Mr. and Mrs. Dursley, 

We have never been introduced, but I am sure you 
have heard a great deal from Harry about my son Ron. 

As Harry might have told you, the final of the 
Quidditch World Cup takes place this Monday night, 
and my husband, Arthur, has just managed to get 
prime tickets through his connections at the 
Department of Magical Games and Sports. 

I do hope you will allow us to take Harry to the match, 
as this really is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity; Britain 
hasn’t hosted the cup for thirty years, and tickets are 
extremely hard to come by. We would of course be glad 
to have Harry stay for the remainder of the summer 
holidays, and to see him safely onto the train back to 
school. 

It would be best for Harry to send us your answer as 
quickly as possible in the normal way, because the 
Muggle postman has never delivered to our house, and 
I am not sure he even knows where it is. 

Hoping to see Harry soon, 

Yours sincerely, 

Molly Weasley 

P.S. I do hope we’ve put enough stamps on. 



Page | 33 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Uncle Vernon finished reading, put his hand back 
into his breast pocket, and drew out something else. 

“Look at this,” he growled. 

He held up the envelope in which Mrs. Weasley’s 
letter had come, and Harry had to fight down a laugh. 
Every bit of it was covered in stamps except for a 
square inch on the front, into which Mrs. Weasley 
had squeezed the Dursleys’ address in minute 
writing. 

“She did put enough stamps on, then,” said Harry, 
trying to sound as though Mrs. Weasley’s was a 
mistake anyone could make. His uncle’s eyes flashed. 

“The postman noticed,” he said through gritted teeth. 
“Very interested to know where this letter came from, 
he was. That’s why he rang the doorbell. Seemed to 
think it was funny.” 

Harry didn’t say anything. Other people might not 
understand why Uncle Vernon was making a fuss 
about too many stamps, but Harry had lived with the 
Dursleys too long not to know how touchy they were 
about anything even slightly out of the ordinary. Their 
worst fear was that someone would find out that they 
were connected (however distantly) with people like 
Mrs. Weasley. 

Uncle Vernon was still glaring at Harry, who tried to 
keep his expression neutral. If he didn’t do or say 
anything stupid, he might just be in for the treat of a 
lifetime. He waited for Uncle Vernon to say 
something, but he merely continued to glare. Harry 
decided to break the silence. 

“So — can I go then?” he asked. 



Page | 34 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A slight spasm crossed Uncle Vernon’s large purple 
face. The mustache bristled. Harry thought he knew 
what was going on behind the mustache: a furious 
battle as two of Uncle Vernon’s most fundamental 
instincts came into conflict. Allowing Harry to go 
would make Harry happy, something Uncle Vernon 
had struggled against for thirteen years. On the other 
hand, allowing Harry to disappear to the Weasleys’ for 
the rest of the summer would get rid of him two 
weeks earlier than anyone could have hoped, and 
Uncle Vernon hated having Harry in the house. To 
give himself thinking time, it seemed, he looked down 
at Mrs. Weasley’s letter again. 

“Who is this woman?” he said, staring at the 
signature with distaste. 

“You’ve seen her,” said Harry. “She’s my friend Ron’s 
mother, she was meeting him off the Hog — off the 
school train at the end of last term.” 

He had almost said “Hogwarts Express,” and that was 
a sure way to get his uncle’s temper up. Nobody ever 
mentioned the name of Harry’s school aloud in the 
Dursley household. 

Uncle Vernon screwed up his enormous face as 
though trying to remember something very 
unpleasant. 

“Dumpy sort of woman?” he growled finally. “Load of 
children with red hair?” 

Harry frowned. He thought it was a bit rich of Uncle 
Vernon to call anyone “dumpy,” when his own son, 
Dudley, had finally achieved what he’d been 
threatening to do since the age of three, and become 
wider than he was tall. 



Page | 35 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Uncle Vernon was perusing the letter again. 

“Quidditch,” he muttered under his breath. 

“Quidditch — what is this rubbish?” 

Harry felt a second stab of annoyance. 

“It’s a sport,” he said shortly. “Played on broom — ” 

“All right, all right!” said Uncle Vernon loudly. Harry 
saw, with some satisfaction, that his uncle looked 
vaguely panicky. Apparently his nerves couldn’t stand 
the sound of the word “broomsticks” in his living 
room. He took refuge in perusing the letter again. 
Harry saw his lips form the words “send us your 
answer ... in the normal way.” He scowled. 

“What does she mean, ‘the normal way’?” he spat. 

“Normal for us,” said Harry, and before his uncle 
could stop him, he added, “you know, owl post. That’s 
what’s normal for wizards.” 

Uncle Vernon looked as outraged as if Harry had just 
uttered a disgusting swear word. Shaking with anger, 
he shot a nervous look through the window, as 
though expecting to see some of the neighbors with 
their ears pressed against the glass. 

“How many times do I have to tell you not to mention 
that unnaturalness under my roof?” he hissed, his 
face now a rich plum color. “You stand there, in the 
clothes Petunia and I have put on your ungrateful 
back — ” 

“Only after Dudley finished with them,” said Harry 
coldly, and indeed, he was dressed in a sweatshirt so 
large for him that he had had to roll back the sleeves 



Page | 36 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




five times so as to be able to use his hands, and 
which fell past the knees of his extremely baggy jeans. 



“I will not be spoken to like that!” said Uncle Vernon, 
trembling with rage. 

But Harry wasn’t going to stand for this. Gone were 
the days when he had been forced to take every single 
one of the Dursleys’ stupid rules. He wasn’t following 
Dudley’s diet, and he wasn’t going to let Uncle Vernon 
stop him from going to the Quidditch World Cup, not 
if he could help it. Harry took a deep, steadying 
breath and then said, “Okay, I can’t see the World 
Cup. Can I go now, then? Only I’ve got a letter to 
Sirius I want to finish. You know — my godfather.” 

He had done it. He had said the magic words. Now he 
watched the purple recede blotchily from Uncle 
Vernon’s face, making it look like badly mixed black 
currant ice cream. 

“You’re — you’re writing to him, are you?” said Uncle 
Vernon, in a would-be calm voice — but Harry had 
seen the pupils of his tiny eyes contract with sudden 
fear. 

“Well — yeah,” said Harry, casually. “It’s been a while 
since he heard from me, and, you know, if he doesn’t, 
he might start thinking something’s wrong.” 

He stopped there to enjoy the effect of these words. 

He could almost see the cogs working under Uncle 
Vernon’s thick, dark, neatly parted hair. If he tried to 
stop Harry writing to Sirius, Sirius would think Harry 
was being mistreated. If he told Harry he couldn’t go 
to the Quidditch World Cup, Harry would write and 
tell Sirius, who would know Harry was being 
mistreated. There was only one thing for Uncle 
Vernon to do. Harry could see the conclusion forming 
Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




in his uncle’s mind as though the great mustached 
face were transparent. Harry tried not to smile, to 
keep his own face as blank as possible. And then — 

“Well, all right then. You can go to this ruddy ... this 
stupid ... this World Cup thing. You write and tell 
these — these Weasleys they’re to pick you up, mind. 
I haven’t got time to go dropping you off all over the 
country. And you can spend the rest of the summer 
there. And you can tell your — your godfather ... tell 
him ... tell him you’re going.” 

“Okay then,” said Harry brightly. 

He turned and walked toward the living room door, 
fighting the urge to jump into the air and whoop. He 
was going ... he was going to the Weasleys’, he was 
going to watch the Quidditch World Cup! 

Outside in the hall he nearly ran into Dudley, who 
had been lurking behind the door, clearly hoping to 
overhear Harry being told off. He looked shocked to 
see the broad grin on Harry’s face. 

“That was an excellent breakfast, wasn’t it?” said 
Harry. “I feel really full, don’t you?” 

Laughing at the astonished look on Dudley’s face, 
Harry took the stairs three at a time, and hurled 
himself back into his bedroom. 

The first thing he saw was that Hedwig was back. She 
was sitting in her cage, staring at Harry with her 
enormous amber eyes, and clicking her beak in the 
way that meant she was annoyed about something. 
Exactly what was annoying her became apparent 
almost at once. 



Page | 38 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“OUCH!” said Harry as what appeared to be a small, 
gray, feathery tennis ball collided with the side of his 
head. Harry massaged the spot furiously, looking up 
to see what had hit him, and saw a minute owl, small 
enough to fit into the palm of his hand, whizzing 
excitedly around the room like a loose firework. Harry 
then realized that the owl had dropped a letter at his 
feet. Harry bent down, recognized Ron’s handwriting, 
then tore open the envelope. Inside was a hastily 
scribbled note. 

Harry — DAD GOT THE TICKETS — Ireland versus 
Bulgaria, Monday night. Mum’s writing to the Muggles 
to ask you to stay. They might already have the letter, 

I don’t know how fast Muggle post is. Thought I’d send 
this with Pig anyway. 

Harry stared at the word “Pig,” then looked up at the 
tiny owl now zooming around the light fixture on the 
ceiling. He had never seen anything that looked less 
like a pig. Maybe he couldn’t read Ron’s writing. He 
went back to the letter: 

We’re coming for you whether the Muggles like it or 
not, you can’t miss the World Cup, only Mum and Dad 
reckon it’s better if we pretend to ask their permission 
first. If they say yes, send Pig back with your answer 
pronto, and we’ll come and get you at five o’clock on 
Sunday. If they say no, send Pig back pronto and we’ll 
come and get you at five o’clock on Sunday anyway. 

Hermione’s arriving this afternoon. Percy’s started 
work — the Department of International Magical 
Cooperation. Don’t mention anything about Abroad 
while you’re here unless you want the pants bored off 
you. 

See you soon — 



Page | 39 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron 



“Calm down!” Harry said as the small owl flew low 
over his head, twittering madly with what Harry could 
only assume was pride at having delivered the letter 
to the right person. “Come here, I need you to take my 
answer back!” 

The owl fluttered down on top of Hedwig’s cage. 
Hedwig looked coldly up at it, as though daring it to 
try and come any closer. 

Harry seized his eagle-feather quill once more, 
grabbed a fresh piece of parchment, and wrote: 

Ron, it’s all okay, the Muggles say I can come. See you 
five o’clock tomorrow. Can’t wait. 

Harry 

He folded this note up very small, and with immense 
difficulty, tied it to the tiny owl’s leg as it hopped on 
the spot with excitement. The moment the note was 
secure, the owl was off again; it zoomed out of the 
window and out of sight. 

Harry turned to Hedwig. 

“Feeling up to a long journey?” he asked her. 

Hedwig hooted in a dignified sort of a way. 

“Can you take this to Sirius for me?” he said, picking 
up his letter. “Hang on ... I just want to finish it.” 

He unfolded the parchment and hastily added a 
postscript. 



Page | 40 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




If you want to contact me, I’ll be at my friend Ron 
Weasley’s for the rest of the summer. His dad’s got us 
tickets for the Quidditch World Cup\ 

The letter finished, he tied it to Hedwig’s leg; she kept 
unusually still, as though determined to show him 
how a real post owl should behave. 

“I’ll be at Ron’s when you get back, all right?” Harry 
told her. 

She nipped his finger affectionately, then, with a soft 
swooshing noise, spread her enormous wings and 
soared out of the open window. 

Harry watched her out of sight, then crawled under 
his bed, wrenched up the loose floorboard, and pulled 
out a large chunk of birthday cake. He sat there on 
the floor eating it, savoring the happiness that was 
flooding through him. He had cake, and Dudley had 
nothing but grapefruit; it was a bright summer’s day, 
he would be leaving Privet Drive tomorrow, his scar 
felt perfectly normal again, and he was going to watch 
the Quidditch World Cup. It was hard, just now, to 
feel worried about anything — even Lord Voldemort. 



Page | 41 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






BACK TO THE BURROW 

By twelve o’clock the next day, Harry’s school trunk 
was packed with his school things and all his most 
prized possessions — the Invisibility Cloak he had 
inherited from his father, the broomstick he had 
gotten from Sirius, the enchanted map of Hogwarts he 
had been given by Fred and George Weasley last year. 
He had emptied his hiding place under the loose 
floorboard of all food, double-checked every nook and 
cranny of his bedroom for forgotten spellbooks or 
quills, and taken down the chart on the wall counting 
down the days to September the first, on which he 
liked to cross off the days remaining until his return 
to Hogwarts. 

The atmosphere inside number four, Privet Drive was 
extremely tense. The imminent arrival at their house 
of an assortment of wizards was making the Dursleys 
uptight and irritable. Uncle Vernon had looked 
downright alarmed when Harry informed him that the 
Weasley s would be arriving at five o’clock the very 
next day. 



Page | 42 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“I hope you told them to dress properly, these people,” 
he snarled at once. “I’ve seen the sort of stuff your lot 
wear. They’d better have the decency to put on 
normal clothes, that’s all.” 

Harry felt a slight sense of foreboding. He had rarely 
seen Mr. or Mrs. Weasley wearing anything that the 
Dursleys would call “normal.” Their children might 
don Muggle clothing during the holidays, but Mr. and 
Mrs. Weasley usually wore long robes in varying 
states of shabbiness. Harry wasn’t bothered about 
what the neighbors would think, but he was anxious 
about how rude the Dursleys might be to the 
Weasleys if they turned up looking like their worst 
idea of wizards. 

Uncle Vernon had put on his best suit. To some 
people, this might have looked like a gesture of 
welcome, but Harry knew it was because Uncle 
Vernon wanted to look impressive and intimidating. 
Dudley, on the other hand, looked somehow 
diminished. This was not because the diet was at last 
taking effect, but due to fright. Dudley had emerged 
from his last encounter with a fully-grown wizard with 
a curly pig’s tail poking out of the seat of his trousers, 
and Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon had had to pay 
for its removal at a private hospital in London. It 
wasn’t altogether surprising, therefore, that Dudley 
kept running his hand nervously over his backside, 
and walking sideways from room to room, so as not to 
present the same target to the enemy. 

Lunch was an almost silent meal. Dudley didn’t even 
protest at the food (cottage cheese and grated celery). 
Aunt Petunia wasn’t eating anything at all. Her arms 
were folded, her lips were pursed, and she seemed to 
be chewing her tongue, as though biting back the 
furious diatribe she longed to throw at Harry. 



Page | 43 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They’ll be driving, of course?” Uncle Vernon barked 
across the table. 

“Er,” said Harry. 

He hadn’t thought of that. How were the Weasleys 
going to pick him up? They didn’t have a car 
anymore; the old Ford Anglia they had once owned 
was currently running wild in the Forbidden Forest at 
Hogwarts. But Mr. Weasley had borrowed a Ministry 
of Magic car last year; possibly he would do the same 
today? 

“I think so,” said Harry. 

Uncle Vernon snorted into his mustache. Normally, 
Uncle Vernon would have asked what car Mr. Weasley 
drove; he tended to judge other men by how big and 
expensive their cars were. But Harry doubted whether 
Uncle Vernon would have taken to Mr. Weasley even 
if he drove a Ferrari. 

Harry spent most of the afternoon in his bedroom; he 
couldn’t stand watching Aunt Petunia peer out 
through the net curtains every few seconds, as 
though there had been a warning about an escaped 
rhinoceros. Finally, at a quarter to five, Harry went 
back downstairs and into the living room. 

Aunt Petunia was compulsively straightening 
cushions. Uncle Vernon was pretending to read the 
paper, but his tiny eyes were not moving, and Harry 
was sure he was really listening with all his might for 
the sound of an approaching car. Dudley was 
crammed into an armchair, his porky hands beneath 
him, clamped firmly around his bottom. Harry 
couldn’t take the tension; he left the room and went 
and sat on the stairs in the hall, his eyes on his 



Page | 44 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




watch and his heart pumping fast from excitement 
and nerves. 

But five o’clock came and then went. Uncle Vernon, 
perspiring slightly in his suit, opened the front door, 
peered up and down the street, then withdrew his 
head quickly. 

“They’re late!” he snarled at Harry. 

“I know,” said Harry. “Maybe — er — the traffic’s bad, 
or something.” 

Ten past five ... then a quarter past five ... Harry was 
starting to feel anxious himself now. At half past, he 
heard Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia conversing in 
terse mutters in the living room. 

“No consideration at all.” 

“We might’ve had an engagement.” 

“Maybe they think theyll get invited to dinner if 
they’re late.” 

“Well, they most certainly won’t be,” said Uncle 
Vernon, and Harry heard him stand up and start 
pacing the living room. “They’ll take the boy and go, 
there 11 be no hanging around. That’s if they’re coming 
at all. Probably mistaken the day. I daresay their kind 
don’t set much store by punctuality. Either that or 
they drive some tin-pot car that’s broken d — 
AAAAAAAARRRRRGH ! ” 

Harry jumped up. From the other side of the living 
room door came the sounds of the three Dursleys 
scrambling, panic-stricken, across the room. Next 
moment Dudley came flying into the hall, looking 
terrified. 

Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What happened?” said Harry. “What’s the matter?” 

But Dudley didn’t seem able to speak. Hands still 
clamped over his buttocks, he waddled as fast as he 
could into the kitchen. Harry hurried into the living 
room. 

Loud hangings and scrapings were coming from 
behind the Dursleys’ boarded-up fireplace, which had 
a fake coal fire plugged in front of it. 

“What is it?” gasped Aunt Petunia, who had backed 
into the wall and was staring, terrified, toward the 
fire. “What is it, Vernon?” 

But they were left in doubt barely a second longer. 
Voices could be heard from inside the blocked 
fireplace. 

“Ouch! Fred, no — go back, go back, there’s been 
some kind of mistake — tell George not to — OUCH! 
George, no, there’s no room, go back quickly and tell 
Ron — ” 

“Maybe Harry can hear us, Dad — maybe he’ll be able 
to let us out — ” 

There was a loud hammering of fists on the boards 
behind the electric fire. 

“Harry? Harry, can you hear us?” 

The Dursleys rounded on Harry like a pair of angry 
wolverines. 

“What is this?” growled Uncle Vernon. “What’s going 
on?” 



Page | 46 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They — they’ve tried to get here by Floo powder,” 
said Harry, fighting a mad desire to laugh. “They can 
travel by fire — only you’ve blocked the fireplace — 
hang on — ” 

He approached the fireplace and called through the 
boards. 

“Mr. Weasley? Can you hear me?” 

The hammering stopped. Somebody inside the 
chimney piece said, “Shh!” 

“Mr. Weasley, it’s Harry ... the fireplace has been 
blocked up. You won’t be able to get through there.” 

“Damn!” said Mr. Weasley’s voice. “What on earth did 
they want to block up the fireplace for?” 

“They’ve got an electric fire,” Harry explained. 

“Really?” said Mr. Weasley’s voice excitedly. “Eclectic, 
you say? With a plug? Gracious, I must see that. ... 
Let’s think ... ouch, Ron!” 

Ron’s voice now joined the others’. 

“What are we doing here? Has something gone 
wrong?” 

“Oh no, Ron,” came Fred’s voice, very sarcastically. 
“No, this is exactly where we wanted to end up.” 

“Yeah, we’re having the time of our lives here,” said 
George, whose voice sounded muffled, as though he 
was squashed against the wall. 



Page | 47 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Boys, boys ...” said Mr. Weasley vaguely. “I’m trying 
to think what to do. ... Yes ... only way ... Stand back, 
Harry.” 

Harry retreated to the sofa. Uncle Vernon, however, 
moved forward. 

“Wait a moment!” he bellowed at the fire. “What 
exactly are you going to — ” 

BANG. 

The electric fire shot across the room as the boarded- 
up fireplace burst outward, expelling Mr. Weasley, 
Fred, George, and Ron in a cloud of rubble and loose 
chippings. Aunt Petunia shrieked and fell backward 
over the coffee table; Uncle Vernon caught her before 
she hit the floor, and gaped, speechless, at the 
Weasleys, all of whom had bright red hair, including 
Fred and George, who were identical to the last 
freckle. 

“That’s better,” panted Mr. Weasley, brushing dust 
from his long green robes and straightening his 
glasses. “Ah — you must be Harry’s aunt and uncle!” 

Tall, thin, and balding, he moved toward Uncle 
Vernon, his hand outstretched, but Uncle Vernon 
backed away several paces, dragging Aunt Petunia. 
Words utterly failed Uncle Vernon. His best suit was 
covered in white dust, which had settled in his hair 
and mustache and made him look as though he had 
just aged thirty years. 

“Er — yes — sorry about that,” said Mr. Weasley, 
lowering his hand and looking over his shoulder at 
the blasted fireplace. “It’s all my fault. It just didn’t 
occur to me that we wouldn’t be able to get out at the 
other end. I had your fireplace connected to the Floo 
Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Network, you see — just for an afternoon, you know, 
so we could get Harry. Muggle fireplaces aren’t 
supposed to be connected, strictly speaking — but 
I’ve got a useful contact at the Floo Regulation Panel 
and he fixed it for me. I can put it right in a jiffy, 
though, don’t worry. I’ll light a fire to send the boys 
back, and then I can repair your fireplace before I 
Disapparate.” 

Harry was ready to bet that the Dursleys hadn’t 
understood a single word of this. They were still 
gaping at Mr. Weasley, thunderstruck. Aunt Petunia 
staggered upright again and hid behind Uncle 
Vernon. 

“Hello, Harry!” said Mr. Weasley brightly. “Got your 
trunk ready?” 

“It’s upstairs,” said Harry, grinning back. 

“Well get it,” said Fred at once. Winking at Harry, he 
and George left the room. They knew where Harry’s 
bedroom was, having once rescued him from it in the 
dead of night. Harry suspected that Fred and George 
were hoping for a glimpse of Dudley; they had heard a 
lot about him from Harry. 

“Well,” said Mr. Weasley, swinging his arms slightly, 
while he tried to find words to break the very nasty 
silence. “Very — erm — very nice place you’ve got 
here.” 

As the usually spotless living room was now covered 
in dust and bits of brick, this remark didn’t go down 
too well with the Dursleys. Uncle Vernon’s face 
purpled once more, and Aunt Petunia started chewing 
her tongue again. However, they seemed too scared to 
actually say anything. 



Page | 49 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Weasley was looking around. He loved everything 
to do with Muggles. Harry could see him itching to go 
and examine the television and the video recorder. 

“They run off eckeltricity, do they?” he said 
knowledgeably. “Ah yes, I can see the plugs. I collect 
plugs,” he added to Uncle Vernon. “And batteries. Got 
a very large collection of batteries. My wife thinks I’m 
mad, but there you are.” 

Uncle Vernon clearly thought Mr. Weasley was mad 
too. He moved ever so slightly to the right, screening 
Aunt Petunia from view, as though he thought Mr. 
Weasley might suddenly run at them and attack. 

Dudley suddenly reappeared in the room. Harry could 
hear the clunk of his trunk on the stairs, and knew 
that the sounds had scared Dudley out of the kitchen. 
Dudley edged along the wall, gazing at Mr. Weasley 
with terrified eyes, and attempted to conceal himself 
behind his mother and father. Unfortunately, Uncle 
Vernon’s bulk, while sufficient to hide bony Aunt 
Petunia, was nowhere near enough to conceal Dudley. 

“Ah, this is your cousin, is it, Harry?” said Mr. 
Weasley, taking another brave stab at making 
conversation. 

“Yep,” said Harry, “that’s Dudley.” 

He and Ron exchanged glances and then quickly 
looked away from each other; the temptation to burst 
out laughing was almost overwhelming. Dudley was 
still clutching his bottom as though afraid it might 
fall off. Mr. Weasley, however, seemed genuinely 
concerned at Dudley’s peculiar behavior. Indeed, from 
the tone of his voice when he next spoke, Harry was 
quite sure that Mr. Weasley thought Dudley was quite 



Page | 50 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




as mad as the Dursleys thought he was, except that 
Mr. Weasley felt sympathy rather than fear. 

“Having a good holiday, Dudley?” he said kindly. 

Dudley whimpered. Harry saw his hands tighten still 
harder over his massive backside. 

Fred and George came back into the room carrying 
Harry’s school trunk. They glanced around as they 
entered and spotted Dudley. Their faces cracked into 
identical evil grins. 

“Ah, right,” said Mr. Weasley. “Better get cracking 
then.” 

He pushed up the sleeves of his robes and took out 
his wand. Harry saw the Dursleys draw back against 
the wall as one. 

“Incendio\” said Mr. Weasley, pointing his wand at the 
hole in the wall behind him. 

Flames rose at once in the fireplace, crackling merrily 
as though they had been burning for hours. Mr. 
Weasley took a small drawstring bag from his pocket, 
untied it, took a pinch of the powder inside, and 
threw it onto the flames, which turned emerald green 
and roared higher than ever. 

“Off you go then, Fred,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“Coming,” said Fred. “Oh no — hang on — ” 

A bag of sweets had spilled out of Fred’s pocket and 
the contents were now rolling in every direction — 
big, fat toffees in brightly colored wrappers. 



Page | 51 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Fred scrambled around, cramming them back into his 
pocket, then gave the Dursleys a cheery wave, 
stepped forward, and walked right into the fire, saying 
“the Burrow!” Aunt Petunia gave a little shuddering 
gasp. There was a whooshing sound, and Fred 
vanished. 

“Right then, George,” said Mr. Weasley, “you and the 
trunk.” 

Harry helped George carry the trunk forward into the 
flames and turn it onto its end so that he could hold 
it better. Then, with a second whoosh, George had 
cried “the Burrow!” and vanished too. 

“Ron, you next,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“See you,” said Ron brightly to the Dursleys. He 
grinned broadly at Harry, then stepped into the fire, 
shouted “the Burrow!” and disappeared. 

Now Harry and Mr. Weasley alone remained. 

“Well ... T>ye then,” Harry said to the Dursleys. 

They didn’t say anything at all. Harry moved toward 
the fire, but just as he reached the edge of the hearth, 
Mr. Weasley put out a hand and held him back. He 
was looking at the Dursleys in amazement. 

“Harry said good-bye to you,” he said. “Didn’t you 
hear him?” 

“It doesn’t matter,” Harry muttered to Mr. Weasley. 
“Honestly, I don’t care.” 

Mr. Weasley did not remove his hand from Harry’s 
shoulder. 



Page | 52 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You aren’t going to see your nephew till next 
summer,” he said to Uncle Vernon in mild 
indignation. “Surely you’re going to say good-bye?” 

Uncle Vernon’s face worked furiously. The idea of 
being taught consideration by a man who had just 
blasted away half his living room wall seemed to be 
causing him intense suffering. But Mr. Weasley’s 
wand was still in his hand, and Uncle Vernon’s tiny 
eyes darted to it once, before he said, very resentfully, 
“Good-bye, then.” 

“See you,” said Harry, putting one foot forward into 
the green flames, which felt pleasantly like warm 
breath. At that moment, however, a horrible gagging 
sound erupted behind him, and Aunt Petunia started 
to scream. 

Harry wheeled around. Dudley was no longer 
standing behind his parents. He was kneeling beside 
the coffee table, and he was gagging and sputtering 
on a foot-long, purple, slimy thing that was 
protruding from his mouth. One bewildered second 
later, Harry realized that the foot-long thing was 
Dudley’s tongue — and that a brightly colored toffee 
wrapper lay on the floor before him. 

Aunt Petunia hurled herself onto the ground beside 
Dudley, seized the end of his swollen tongue, and 
attempted to wrench it out of his mouth; 
unsurprisingly, Dudley yelled and sputtered worse 
than ever, trying to fight her off. Uncle Vernon was 
bellowing and waving his arms around, and Mr. 
Weasley had to shout to make himself heard. 

“Not to worry, I can sort him out!” he yelled, 
advancing on Dudley with his wand outstretched, but 
Aunt Petunia screamed worse than ever and threw 



Page | 53 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




herself on top of Dudley, shielding him from Mr. 
Weasley. 



“No, really!” said Mr. Weasley desperately. “It’s a 
simple process — it was the toffee — my son Fred — 
real practical joker — but it’s only an Engorgement 
Charm — at least, I think it is — please, I can correct 



it — ” 



But far from being reassured, the Dursleys became 
more panic-stricken; Aunt Petunia was sobbing 
hysterically, tugging Dudley’s tongue as though 
determined to rip it out; Dudley appeared to be 
suffocating under the combined pressure of his 
mother and his tongue; and Uncle Vernon, who had 
lost control completely, seized a china figure from on 
top of the sideboard and threw it very hard at Mr. 
Weasley, who ducked, causing the ornament to 
shatter in the blasted fireplace. 

“Now really!” said Mr. Weasley angrily, brandishing 
his wand. “I’m trying to help\” 

Bellowing like a wounded hippo, Uncle Vernon 
snatched up another ornament. 

“Harry, go! Just go!” Mr. Weasley shouted, his wand 
on Uncle Vernon. “I’ll sort this out!” 

Harry didn’t want to miss the fun, but Uncle Vernon’s 
second ornament narrowly missed his left ear, and on 
balance he thought it best to leave the situation to 
Mr. Weasley. He stepped into the fire, looking over his 
shoulder as he said “the Burrow!” His last fleeting 
glimpse of the living room was of Mr. Weasley blasting 
a third ornament out of Uncle Vernon’s hand with his 
wand, Aunt Petunia screaming and lying on top of 
Dudley, and Dudley’s tongue lolling around like a 
great slimy python. But next moment Harry had 
Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




begun to spin very fast, and the Dursleys’ living room 
was whipped out of sight in a rush of emerald-green 
flames. 



Page | 55 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




5 




WEASLEYS’ WIZARD WHEEZES 

Harry spun faster and faster, elbows tucked tightly to 
his sides, blurred fireplaces flashing past him, until 
he started to feel sick and closed his eyes. Then, 
when at last he felt himself slowing down, he threw 
out his hands and came to a halt in time to prevent 
himself from falling face forward out of the Weasleys’ 
kitchen fire. 

“Did he eat it?” said Fred excitedly, holding out a 
hand to pull Harry to his feet. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, straightening up. “What was it?” 

“Ton-Tongue Toffee,” said Fred brightly. “George and I 
invented them, and we’ve been looking for someone to 
test them on all summer. ...” 

The tiny kitchen exploded with laughter; Harry looked 
around and saw that Ron and George were sitting at 
the scrubbed wooden table with two red-haired people 
Harry had never seen before, though he knew 

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



immediately who they must be: Bill and Charlie, the 
two eldest Weasley brothers. 



“How’re you doing, Harry?” said the nearer of the two, 
grinning at him and holding out a large hand, which 
Harry shook, feeling calluses and blisters under his 
fingers. This had to be Charlie, who worked with 
dragons in Romania. Charlie was built like the twins, 
shorter and stockier than Percy and Ron, who were 
both long and lanky. He had a broad, good-natured 
face, which was weather-beaten and so freckly that he 
looked almost tanned; his arms were muscular, and 
one of them had a large, shiny burn on it. 

Bill got to his feet, smiling, and also shook Harry’s 
hand. Bill came as something of a surprise. Harry 
knew that he worked for the wizarding bank, 
Gringotts, and that Bill had been Head Boy at 
Hogwarts; Harry had always imagined Bill to be an 
older version of Percy: fussy about rule-breaking and 
fond of bossing everyone around. However, Bill was — 
there was no other word for it — cool. He was tall, 
with long hair that he had tied back in a ponytail. He 
was wearing an earring with what looked like a fang 
dangling from it. Bill’s clothes would not have looked 
out of place at a rock concert, except that Harry 
recognized his boots to be made, not of leather, but of 
dragon hide. 

Before any of them could say anything else, there was 
a faint popping noise, and Mr. Weasley appeared out 
of thin air at George’s shoulder. He was looking 
angrier than Harry had ever seen him. 

“That wasn’t funny, Fred!” he shouted. “What on 
earth did you give that Muggle boy?” 



Page | 57 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I didn’t give him anything,” said Fred, with another 
evil grin. “I just dropped it. ... It was his fault he went 
and ate it, I never told him to.” 

“You dropped it on purpose!” roared Mr. Weasley. 

“You knew he’d eat it, you knew he was on a diet — ” 

“How big did his tongue get?” George asked eagerly. 

“It was four feet long before his parents would let me 
shrink it!” 

Harry and the Weasleys roared with laughter again. 

“It isn’t funny\” Mr. Weasley shouted. “That sort of 
behavior seriously undermines wizard-Muggle 
relations! I spend half my life campaigning against the 
mistreatment of Muggles, and my own sons — ” 

“We didn’t give it to him because he’s a Muggle!” said 
Fred indignantly. 

“No, we gave it to him because he’s a great bullying 
git,” said George. “Isn’t he, Harry?” 

“Yeah, he is, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry earnestly. 

“That’s not the point!” raged Mr. Weasley. “You wait 
until I tell your mother — ” 

“Tell me what?” said a voice behind them. 

Mrs. Weasley had just entered the kitchen. She was a 
short, plump woman with a very kind face, though 
her eyes were presently narrowed with suspicion. 

“Oh hello, Harry, dear,” she said, spotting him and 
smiling. Then her eyes snapped back to her husband. 
“Tell me what , Arthur?” 

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Weasley hesitated. Harry could tell that, however 
angry he was with Fred and George, he hadn’t really 
intended to tell Mrs. Weasley what had happened. 
There was a silence, while Mr. Weasley eyed his wife 
nervously. Then two girls appeared in the kitchen 
doorway behind Mrs. Weasley. One, with very bushy 
brown hair and rather large front teeth, was Harry’s 
and Ron’s friend, Hermione Granger. The other, who 
was small and red-haired, was Ron’s younger sister, 
Ginny. Both of them smiled at Harry, who grinned 
back, which made Ginny go scarlet — she had been 
very taken with Harry ever since his first visit to the 
Burrow. 

“Tell me what, Arthur?” Mrs. Weasley repeated, in a 
dangerous sort of voice. 

“It’s nothing, Molly,” mumbled Mr. Weasley, “Fred and 
George just — but I’ve had words with them — ” 

“What have they done this time?” said Mrs. Weasley. 
“If it’s got anything to do with Weasleys’ Wizard 
Wheezes — ” 

“Why don’t you show Harry where he’s sleeping, 

Ron?” said Hermione from the doorway. 

“He knows where he’s sleeping,” said Ron, “in my 
room, he slept there last — ” 

“We can all go,” said Hermione pointedly. 

“Oh,” said Ron, cottoning on. “Right.” 

“Yeah, we’ll come too,” said George. 

“You stay where you are!” snarled Mrs. Weasley. 



Page | 59 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry and Ron edged out of the kitchen, and they, 
Hermione, and Ginny set off along the narrow hallway 
and up the rickety staircase that zigzagged through 
the house to the upper stories. 

“What are Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes?” Harry asked 
as they climbed. 

Ron and Ginny both laughed, although Hermione 
didn’t. 

“Mum found this stack of order forms when she was 
cleaning Fred and George’s room,” said Ron quietly. 
“Great long price lists for stuff they’ve invented. Joke 
stuff, you know. Fake wands and trick sweets, loads 
of stuff. It was brilliant, I never knew they’d been 
inventing all that ...” 

“We’ve been hearing explosions out of their room for 
ages, but we never thought they were actually making 
things,” said Ginny. “We thought they just liked the 
noise.” 

“Only, most of the stuff — well, all of it, really — was 
a bit dangerous,” said Ron, “and, you know, they were 
planning to sell it at Hogwarts to make some money, 
and Mum went mad at them. Told them they weren’t 
allowed to make any more of it, and burned all the 
order forms. ... She’s furious at them anyway. They 
didn’t get as many O.W.L.s as she expected.” 

O.W.L.s were Ordinary Wizarding Levels, the 
examinations Hogwarts students took at the age of 
fifteen. 

“And then there was this big row,” Ginny said, 
“because Mum wants them to go into the Ministry of 
Magic like Dad, and they told her all they want to do 
is open a joke shop.” 

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Just then a door on the second landing opened, and a 
face poked out wearing horn-rimmed glasses and a 
very annoyed expression. 

“Hi, Percy,” said Harry. 

“Oh hello, Harry,” said Percy. “I was wondering who 
was making all the noise. I’m trying to work in here, 
you know — I’ve got a report to finish for the office — 
and it’s rather difficult to concentrate when people 
keep thundering up and down the stairs.” 

“We’re not thundering,” said Ron irritably. “We’re 
walking. Sorry if we’ve disturbed the top-secret 
workings of the Ministry of Magic.” 

“What are you working on?” said Harry. 

“A report for the Department of International Magical 
Cooperation,” said Percy smugly. “We’re trying to 
standardize cauldron thickness. Some of these foreign 
imports are just a shade too thin — leakages have 
been increasing at a rate of almost three percent a 
year — ” 

“That’ll change the world, that report will,” said Ron. 
“Front page of the Daily Prophet, I expect, cauldron 
leaks.” 

Percy went slightly pink. 

“You might sneer, Ron,” he said heatedly, “but unless 
some sort of international law is imposed we might 
well find the market flooded with flimsy, shallow- 
bottomed products that seriously endanger — ” 

“Yeah, yeah, all right,” said Ron, and he started off 
upstairs again. Percy slammed his bedroom door 
shut. As Harry, Hermione, and Ginny followed Ron up 

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




three more flights of stairs, shouts from the kitchen 
below echoed up to them. It sounded as though Mr. 
Weasley had told Mrs. Weasley about the toffees. 

The room at the top of the house where Ron slept 
looked much as it had the last time that Harry had 
come to stay: the same posters of Ron’s favorite 
Quidditch team, the Chudley Cannons, were whirling 
and waving on the walls and sloping ceiling, and the 
fish tank on the windowsill, which had previously 
held frog spawn, now contained one extremely large 
frog. Ron’s old rat, Scabbers, was here no more, but 
instead there was the tiny gray owl that had delivered 
Ron’s letter to Harry in Privet Drive. It was hopping 
up and down in a small cage and twittering madly. 

“Shut up, Pig,” said Ron, edging his way between two 
of the four beds that had been squeezed into the 
room. “Fred and George are in here with us, because 
Bill and Charlie are in their room,” he told Harry. 
“Percy gets to keep his room all to himself because 
he’s got to work.” 

“Er — why are you calling that owl Pig?” Harry asked 
Ron. 

“Because he’s being stupid,” said Ginny. “Its proper 
name is Pigwidgeon.” 

“Yeah, and that’s not a stupid name at all,” said Ron 
sarcastically. “Ginny named him,” he explained to 
Harry. “She reckons it’s sweet. And I tried to change 
it, but it was too late, he won’t answer to anything 
else. So now he’s Pig. I’ve got to keep him up here 
because he annoys Errol and Hermes. He annoys me 
too, come to that.” 

Pigwidgeon zoomed happily around his cage, hooting 
shrilly. Harry knew Ron too well to take him 

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




seriously. He had moaned continually about his old 
rat, Scabbers, but had been most upset when 
Hermione’s cat, Crookshanks, appeared to have eaten 
him. 

“Where’s Crookshanks?” Harry asked Hermione now. 

“Out in the garden, I expect,” she said. “He likes 
chasing gnomes. He’s never seen any before.” 

“Percy’s enjoying work, then?” said Harry, sitting 
down on one of the beds and watching the Chudley 
Cannons zooming in and out of the posters on the 
ceiling. 

“Enjoying it?” said Ron darkly. “I don’t reckon he’d 
come home if Dad didn’t make him. He’s obsessed. 
Just don’t get him onto the subject of his boss. 
According to Mr. Crouch ... as I was saying to Mr. 
Crouch . . . Mr. Crouch is of the opinion . . . Mr. Crouch 
was telling me ... They 11 be announcing their 
engagement any day now.” 

“Have you had a good summer, Harry?” said 
Hermione. “Did you get our food parcels and 
everything?” 

“Yeah, thanks a lot,” said Harry. “They saved my life, 
those cakes.” 

“And have you heard from — ?” Ron began, but at a 
look from Hermione he fell silent. Harry knew Ron 
had been about to ask about Sirius. Ron and 
Hermione had been so deeply involved in helping 
Sirius escape from the Ministry of Magic that they 
were almost as concerned about Harry’s godfather as 
he was. However, discussing him in front of Ginny 
was a bad idea. Nobody but themselves and Professor 



Page | 63 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore knew about how Sirius had escaped, or 
believed in his innocence. 

“I think they’ve stopped arguing,” said Hermione, to 
cover the awkward moment, because Ginny was 
looking curiously from Ron to Harry. “Shall we go 
down and help your mum with dinner?” 

“Yeah, all right,” said Ron. The four of them left Ron’s 
room and went back downstairs to find Mrs. Weasley 
alone in the kitchen, looking extremely bad-tempered. 

“We’re eating out in the garden,” she said when they 
came in. “There’s just not room for eleven people in 
here. Could you take the plates outside, girls? Bill 
and Charlie are setting up the tables. Knives and 
forks, please, you two,” she said to Ron and Harry, 
pointing her wand a little more vigorously than she 
had intended at a pile of potatoes in the sink, which 
shot out of their skins so fast that they ricocheted off 
the walls and ceiling. 

“Oh for heaven’s sake,” she snapped, now directing 
her wand at a dustpan, which hopped off the 
sideboard and started skating across the floor, 
scooping up the potatoes. “Those two!” she burst out 
savagely, now pulling pots and pans out of a 
cupboard, and Harry knew she meant Fred and 
George. “I don’t know what’s going to happen to them, 
I really don’t. No ambition, unless you count making 
as much trouble as they possibly can. ...” 

Mrs. Weasley slammed a large copper saucepan down 
on the kitchen table and began to wave her wand 
around inside it. A creamy sauce poured from the 
wand tip as she stirred. 

“It’s not as though they haven’t got brains,” she 
continued irritably, taking the saucepan over to the 

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




stove and lighting it with a further poke of her wand, 
“but they’re wasting them, and unless they pull 
themselves together soon, they’ll be in real trouble. 
I’ve had more owls from Hogwarts about them than 
the rest put together. If they carry on the way they’re 
going, they’ll end up in front of the Improper Use of 
Magic Office.” 

Mrs. Weasley jabbed her wand at the cutlery drawer, 
which shot open. Harry and Ron both jumped out of 
the way as several knives soared out of it, flew across 
the kitchen, and began chopping the potatoes, which 
had just been tipped back into the sink by the 
dustpan. 

“I don’t know where we went wrong with them,” said 
Mrs. Weasley, putting down her wand and starting to 
pull out still more saucepans. “It’s been the same for 
years, one thing after another, and they won’t listen 
to — OH NOT AGAIN.” 

She had picked up her wand from the table, and it 
had emitted a loud squeak and turned into a giant 
rubber mouse. 

“One of their fake wands again!” she shouted. “How 
many times have I told them not to leave them lying 
around?” 

She grabbed her real wand and turned around to find 
that the sauce on the stove was smoking. 

“C’mon,” Ron said hurriedly to Harry, seizing a 
handful of cutlery from the open drawer, “let’s go and 
help Bill and Charlie.” 

They left Mrs. Weasley and headed out the back door 
into the yard. 



Page | 65 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They had only gone a few paces when Hermione’s 
bandy-legged ginger cat, Crookshanks, came pelting 
out of the garden, bottle-brush tail held high in the 
air, chasing what looked like a muddy potato on legs. 
Harry recognized it instantly as a gnome. Barely ten 
inches high, its horny little feet pattered very fast as it 
sprinted across the yard and dived headlong into one 
of the Wellington boots that lay scattered around the 
door. Harry could hear the gnome giggling madly as 
Crookshanks inserted a paw into the boot, trying to 
reach it. Meanwhile, a very loud crashing noise was 
coming from the other side of the house. The source 
of the commotion was revealed as they entered the 
garden, and saw that Bill and Charlie both had their 
wands out, and were making two battered old tables 
fly high above the lawn, smashing into each other, 
each attempting to knock the other’s out of the air. 
Fred and George were cheering, Ginny was laughing, 
and Hermione was hovering near the hedge, 
apparently torn between amusement and anxiety. 

Bill’s table caught Charlie’s with a huge bang and 
knocked one of its legs off. There was a clatter from 
overhead, and they all looked up to see Percy’s head 
poking out of a window on the second floor. 

“Will you keep it down?!” he bellowed. 

“Sorry, Perce,” said Bill, grinning. “How’re the 
cauldron bottoms coming on?” 

“Very badly,” said Percy peevishly, and he slammed 
the window shut. Chuckling, Bill and Charlie directed 
the tables safely onto the grass, end to end, and then, 
with a flick of his wand, Bill reattached the table leg 
and conjured tablecloths from nowhere. 

By seven o’clock, the two tables were groaning under 
dishes and dishes of Mrs. Weasley’s excellent cooking, 

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and the nine Weasleys, Harry, and Hermione were 
settling themselves down to eat beneath a clear, deep- 
blue sky. To somebody who had been living on meals 
of increasingly stale cake all summer, this was 
paradise, and at first, Harry listened rather than 
talked as he helped himself to chicken and ham pie, 
boiled potatoes, and salad. 

At the far end of the table, Percy was telling his father 
all about his report on cauldron bottoms. 

“I’ve told Mr. Crouch that I’ll have it ready by 
Tuesday,” Percy was saying pompously. “That’s a bit 
sooner than he expected it, but I like to keep on top of 
things. I think he’ll be grateful I’ve done it in good 
time, I mean, it’s extremely busy in our department 
just now, what with all the arrangements for the 
World Cup. We’re just not getting the support we 
need from the Department of Magical Games and 
Sports. Ludo Bagman — ” 

“I like Ludo,” said Mr. Weasley mildly. “He was the 
one who got us such good tickets for the Cup. I did 
him a bit of a favor: His brother, Otto, got into a spot 
of trouble — a lawnmower with unnatural powers — I 
smoothed the whole thing over.” 

“Oh Bagman’s likable enough, of course,” said Percy 
dismissively, “but how he ever got to be Head of 
Department ... when I compare him to Mr. Crouch! I 
can’t see Mr. Crouch losing a member of our 
department and not trying to find out what’s 
happened to them. You realize Bertha Jorkins has 
been missing for over a month now? Went on holiday 
to Albania and never came back?” 

“Yes, I was asking Ludo about that,” said Mr. 

Weasley, frowning. “He says Bertha’s gotten lost 



Page | 67 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




plenty of times before now — though I must say, if it 
was someone in my department, I’d be worried. ...” 

“Oh Bertha’s hopeless, all right,” said Percy. “I hear 
she’s been shunted from department to department 
for years, much more trouble than she’s worth ... but 
all the same, Bagman ought to be trying to find her. 
Mr. Crouch has been taking a personal interest, she 
worked in our department at one time, you know, and 
I think Mr. Crouch was quite fond of her — but 
Bagman just keeps laughing and saying she probably 
misread the map and ended up in Australia instead of 
Albania. However” — Percy heaved an impressive sigh 
and took a deep swig of elderflower wine — “we’ve got 
quite enough on our plates at the Department of 
International Magical Cooperation without trying to 
find members of other departments too. As you know, 
we’ve got another big event to organize right after the 
World Cup.” 

Percy cleared his throat significantly and looked down 
toward the end of the table where Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione were sitting. “ You know the one I’m talking 
about, Father.” He raised his voice slightly. “The top- 
secret one.” 

Ron rolled his eyes and muttered to Harry and 
Hermione, “He’s been trying to get us to ask what that 
event is ever since he started work. Probably an 
exhibition of thick-bottomed cauldrons.” 

In the middle of the table, Mrs. Weasley was arguing 
with Bill about his earring, which seemed to be a 
recent acquisition. 

“... with a horrible great fang on it. Really, Bill, what 
do they say at the bank?” 



Page | 68 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Mum, no one at the bank gives a damn how I dress 
as long as I bring home plenty of treasure,” said Bill 
patiently. 

“And your hair’s getting silly, dear,” said Mrs. 

Weasley, fingering her wand lovingly. “I wish you’d let 
me give it a trim. ...” 

“I like it,” said Ginny, who was sitting beside Bill. 
“You’re so old-fashioned, Mum. Anyway, it’s nowhere 
near as long as Professor Dumbledore’s. ...” 

Next to Mrs. Weasley, Fred, George, and Charlie were 
all talking spiritedly about the World Cup. 

“It’s got to be Ireland,” said Charlie thickly, through a 
mouthful of potato. “They flattened Peru in the 
semifinals.” 

“Bulgaria has got Viktor Krum, though,” said Fred. 

“Krum’s one decent player, Ireland has got seven,” 
said Charlie shortly. “I wish England had got through. 
That was embarrassing, that was.” 

“What happened?” said Harry eagerly, regretting more 
than ever his isolation from the wizarding world when 
he was stuck on Privet Drive. 

“Went down to Transylvania, three hundred and 
ninety to ten,” said Charlie gloomily. “Shocking 
performance. And Wales lost to Uganda, and Scotland 
was slaughtered by Luxembourg.” 

Harry had been on the Gryffindor House Quidditch 
team ever since his first year at Hogwarts and owned 
one of the best racing brooms in the world, a Firebolt. 
Flying came more naturally to Harry than anything 



Page | 69 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




else in the magical world, and he played in the 
position of Seeker on the Gryffindor House team. 

Mr. Weasley conjured up candles to light the 
darkening garden before they had their homemade 
strawberry ice cream, and by the time they had 
finished, moths were fluttering low over the table, and 
the warm air was perfumed with the smells of grass 
and honeysuckle. Harry was feeling extremely well fed 
and at peace with the world as he watched several 
gnomes sprinting through the rosebushes, laughing 
madly and closely pursued by Crookshanks. 

Ron looked carefully up the table to check that the 
rest of the family were all busy talking, then he said 
very quietly to Harry, “So — have you heard from 
Sirius lately?” 

Hermione looked around, listening closely. 

“Yeah,” said Harry softly, “twice. He sounds okay. I 
wrote to him yesterday. He might write back while I’m 
here.” 

He suddenly remembered the reason he had written 
to Sirius, and for a moment was on the verge of telling 
Ron and Hermione about his scar hurting again, and 
about the dream that had awoken him . . . but he 
really didn’t want to worry them just now, not when 
he himself was feeling so happy and peaceful. 

“Look at the time,” Mrs. Weasley said suddenly, 
checking her wristwatch. “You really should be in 
bed, the whole lot of you — you’ll be up at the crack 
of dawn to get to the Cup. Harry, if you leave your 
school list out, I’ll get your things for you tomorrow in 
Diagon Alley. I’m getting everyone else’s. There might 
not be time after the World Cup, the match went on 
for five days last time.” 

Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




“Wow — hope it does this time!” said Harry 
enthusiastically. 

“Well, I certainly don’t,” said Percy sanctimoniously. “I 
shudder to think what the state of my in-tray would 
be if I was away from work for five days.” 

“Yeah, someone might slip dragon dung in it again, 
eh, Perce?” said Fred. 

“That was a sample of fertilizer from Norway!” said 
Percy, going very red in the face. “It was nothing 
personall” 

“It was,” Fred whispered to Harry as they got up from 
the table. “We sent it.” 



Page | 71 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 







THE PORTKEY 

Harry felt as though he had barely lain down to sleep 
in Ron’s room when he was being shaken awake by 
Mrs. Weasley. 

“Time to go, Harry, dear,” she whispered, moving 
away to wake Ron. 

Harry felt around for his glasses, put them on, and 
sat up. It was still dark outside. Ron muttered 
indistinctly as his mother roused him. At the foot of 
Harry’s mattress he saw two large, disheveled shapes 
emerging from tangles of blankets. 

“ ’S’ time already?” said Fred groggily. 

They dressed in silence, too sleepy to talk, then, 
yawning and stretching, the four of them headed 
downstairs into the kitchen. 

Mrs. Weasley was stirring the contents of a large pot 
on the stove, while Mr. Weasley was sitting at the 
table, checking a sheaf of large parchment tickets. He 

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



looked up as the boys entered and spread his arms so 
that they could see his clothes more clearly. He was 
wearing what appeared to be a golfing sweater and a 
very old pair of jeans, slightly too big for him and held 
up with a thick leather belt. 

“What d’you think?” he asked anxiously. “We’re 
supposed to go incognito — do I look like a Muggle, 
Harry?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, smiling, “very good.” 

“Where ’re Bill and Charlie and Per-Per-Percy?” said 
George, failing to stifle a huge yawn. 

“Well, they’re Apparating, aren’t they?” said Mrs. 
Weasley, heaving the large pot over to the table and 
starting to ladle porridge into bowls. “So they can 
have a bit of a lie-in.” 

Harry knew that Apparating meant disappearing from 
one place and reappearing almost instantly in 
another, but had never known any Hogwarts student 
to do it, and understood that it was very difficult. 

“So they’re still in bed?” said Fred grumpily, pulling 
his bowl of porridge toward him. “Why can’t we 
Apparate too?” 

“Because you’re not of age and you haven’t passed 
your test,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “And where have 
those girls got to?” 

She bustled out of the kitchen and they heard her 
climbing the stairs. 

“You have to pass a test to Apparate?” Harry asked. 



Page | 73 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh yes,” said Mr. Weasley, tucking the tickets safely 
into the back pocket of his jeans. “The Department of 
Magical Transportation had to fine a couple of people 
the other day for Apparating without a license. It’s not 
easy, Apparition, and when it’s not done properly it 
can lead to nasty complications. This pair I’m talking 
about went and splinched themselves.” 

Everyone around the table except Harry winced. 

“Er — splinched?” said Harry. 

“They left half of themselves behind,” said Mr. 

Weasley, now spooning large amounts of treacle onto 
his porridge. “So, of course, they were stuck. Couldn’t 
move either way. Had to wait for the Accidental Magic 
Reversal Squad to sort them out. Meant a fair old bit 
of paperwork, I can tell you, what with the Muggles 
who spotted the body parts they’d left behind. ...” 

Harry had a sudden vision of a pair of legs and an 
eyeball lying abandoned on the pavement of Privet 
Drive. 

“Were they okay?” he asked, startled. 

“Oh yes,” said Mr. Weasley matter-of-factly. “But they 
got a heavy fine, and I don’t think they’ll be trying it 
again in a hurry. You don’t mess around with 
Apparition. There are plenty of adult wizards who 
don’t bother with it. Prefer brooms — slower, but 
safer.” 

“But Bill and Charlie and Percy can all do it?” 

“Charlie had to take the test twice,” said Fred, 
grinning. “He failed the first time, Apparated five 
miles south of where he meant to, right on top of 
some poor old dear doing her shopping, remember?” 

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, well, he passed the second time,” said Mrs. 
Weasley, marching back into the kitchen amid hearty 
sniggers. 

“Percy only passed two weeks ago,” said George. “He’s 
been Apparating downstairs every morning since, just 
to prove he can.” 

There were footsteps down the passageway and 
Hermione and Ginny came into the kitchen, both 
looking pale and drowsy. 

“Why do we have to be up so early?” Ginny said, 
rubbing her eyes and sitting down at the table. 

“We’ve got a bit of a walk,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“Walk?” said Harry. “What, are we walking to the 
World Cup?” 

“No, no, that’s miles away,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling. 
“We only need to walk a short way. It’s just that it’s 
very difficult for a large number of wizards to 
congregate without attracting Muggle attention. We 
have to be very careful about how we travel at the 
best of times, and on a huge occasion like the 
Quidditch World Cup — ” 

“George!” said Mrs. Weasley sharply, and they all 
jumped. 

“What?” said George, in an innocent tone that 
deceived nobody. 

“What is that in your pocket?” 

“Nothing!” 

“Don’t you lie to me!” 

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley pointed her wand at George’s pocket 
and said, “Acciol” 

Several small, brightly colored objects zoomed out of 
George’s pocket; he made a grab for them but missed, 
and they sped right into Mrs. Weasley ’s outstretched 
hand. 

“We told you to destroy them!” said Mrs. Weasley 
furiously, holding up what were unmistakably more 
Ton-Tongue Toffees. “We told you to get rid of the lot! 
Empty your pockets, go on, both of you!” 

It was an unpleasant scene; the twins had evidently 
been trying to smuggle as many toffees out of the 
house as possible, and it was only by using her 
Summoning Charm that Mrs. Weasley managed to 
find them all. 

“Acciol Acciol Acciol” she shouted, and toffees zoomed 
from all sorts of unlikely places, including the lining 
of George’s jacket and the turn-ups of Fred’s jeans. 

“We spent six months developing those!” Fred 
shouted at his mother as she threw the toffees away. 

“Oh a fine way to spend six months!” she shrieked. 

“No wonder you didn’t get more O.W.L.s!” 

All in all, the atmosphere was not very friendly as 
they took their departure. Mrs. Weasley was still 
glowering as she kissed Mr. Weasley on the cheek, 
though not nearly as much as the twins, who had 
each hoisted their rucksacks onto their backs and 
walked out without a word to her. 

“Well, have a lovely time,” said Mrs. Weasley, “and 
behave yourselves,” she called after the twins’ 
retreating backs, but they did not look back or 

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




answer. “I’ll send Bill, Charlie, and Percy along 
around midday,” Mrs. Weasley said to Mr. Weasley, as 
he, Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny set off across 
the dark yard after Fred and George. 

It was chilly and the moon was still out. Only a dull, 
greenish tinge along the horizon to their right showed 
that daybreak was drawing closer. Harry, having been 
thinking about thousands of wizards speeding toward 
the Quidditch World Cup, sped up to walk with Mr. 
Weasley. 

“So how does everyone get there without all the 
Muggles noticing?” he asked. 

“It’s been a massive organizational problem,” sighed 
Mr. Weasley. “The trouble is, about a hundred 
thousand wizards turn up at the World Cup, and of 
course, we just haven’t got a magical site big enough 
to accommodate them all. There are places Muggles 
can’t penetrate, but imagine trying to pack a hundred 
thousand wizards into Diagon Alley or platform nine 
and three-quarters. So we had to find a nice deserted 
moor, and set up as many anti-Muggle precautions as 
possible. The whole Ministry’s been working on it for 
months. First, of course, we have to stagger the 
arrivals. People with cheaper tickets have to arrive 
two weeks beforehand. A limited number use Muggle 
transport, but we can’t have too many clogging up 
their buses and trains — remember, wizards are 
coming from all over the world. Some Apparate, of 
course, but we have to set up safe points for them to 
appear, well away from Muggles. I believe there’s a 
handy wood they’re using as the Apparition point. For 
those who don’t want to Apparate, or can’t, we use 
Portkeys. They’re objects that are used to transport 
wizards from one spot to another at a prearranged 
time. You can do large groups at a time if you need to. 
There have been two hundred Portkeys placed at 
Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




strategic points around Britain, and the nearest one 
to us is up at the top of Stoatshead Hill, so that’s 
where we’re headed.” 

Mr. Weasley pointed ahead of them, where a large 
black mass rose beyond the village of Ottery St. 
Catchpole. 

“What sort of objects are Portkeys?” said Harry 
curiously. 

“Well, they can be anything,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“Unobtrusive things, obviously, so Muggles don’t go 
picking them up and playing with them . . . stuff they’ll 
just think is litter. ...” 

They trudged down the dark, dank lane toward the 
village, the silence broken only by their footsteps. The 
sky lightened very slowly as they made their way 
through the village, its inky blackness diluting to 
deepest blue. Harry’s hands and feet were freezing. 

Mr. Weasley kept checking his watch. 

They didn’t have breath to spare for talking as they 
began to climb Stoatshead Hill, stumbling 
occasionally in hidden rabbit holes, slipping on thick 
black tuffets of grass. Each breath Harry took was 
sharp in his chest and his legs were starting to seize 
up when, at last, his feet found level ground. 

“Whew,” panted Mr. Weasley, taking off his glasses 
and wiping them on his sweater. “Well, we’ve made 
good time — we’ve got ten minutes. ...” 

Hermione came over the crest of the hill last, 
clutching a stitch in her side. 



Page | 78 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Now we just need the Portkey,” said Mr. Weasley, 
replacing his glasses and squinting around at the 
ground. “It won’t be big. ... Come on ...” 

They spread out, searching. They had only been at it 
for a couple of minutes, however, when a shout rent 
the still air. 

“Over here, Arthur! Over here, son, we’ve got it!” 

Two tall figures were silhouetted against the starry 
sky on the other side of the hilltop. 

“Amos!” said Mr. Weasley, smiling as he strode over to 
the man who had shouted. The rest of them followed. 

Mr. Weasley was shaking hands with a ruddy-faced 
wizard with a scrubby brown beard, who was holding 
a moldy-looking old boot in his other hand. 

“This is Amos Diggory, everyone,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“He works for the Department for the Regulation and 
Control of Magical Creatures. And I think you know 
his son, Cedric?” 

Cedric Diggory was an extremely handsome boy of 
around seventeen. He was Captain and Seeker of the 
Hufflepuff House Quidditch team at Hogwarts. 

“Hi,” said Cedric, looking around at them all. 

Everybody said hi back except Fred and George, who 
merely nodded. They had never quite forgiven Cedric 
for beating their team, Gryffindor, in the first 
Quidditch match of the previous year. 

“Long walk, Arthur?” Cedric’s father asked. 



Page | 79 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Not too bad,” said Mr. Weasley. “We live just on the 
other side of the village there. You?” 

“Had to get up at two, didn’t we, Ced? I tell you, I’ll be 
glad when he’s got his Apparition test. Still ... not 
complaining ... Quidditch World Cup, wouldn’t miss it 
for a sackful of Galleons — and the tickets cost about 
that. Mind you, looks like I got off easy. ...” Amos 
Diggory peered good-naturedly around at the three 
Weasley boys, Harry, Hermione, and Ginny. “All these 
yours, Arthur?” 

“Oh no, only the redheads,” said Mr. Weasley, 
pointing out his children. “This is Hermione, friend of 
Ron’s — and Harry, another friend — ” 

“Merlin’s beard,” said Amos Diggory, his eyes 
widening. “Harry? Harry Potter?” 

“Er — yeah,” said Harry. 

Harry was used to people looking curiously at him 
when they met him, used to the way their eyes moved 
at once to the lightning scar on his forehead, but it 
always made him feel uncomfortable. 

“Ced’s talked about you, of course,” said Amos 
Diggory. “Told us all about playing against you last 
year. ... I said to him, I said — Ced, that’ll be 
something to tell your grandchildren, that will. ... You 
beat Harry Potterl” 

Harry couldn’t think of any reply to this, so he 
remained silent. Fred and George were both scowling 
again. Cedric looked slightly embarrassed. 

“Harry fell off his broom, Dad,” he muttered. “I told 
you ... it was an accident. ...” 



Page | 80 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, but you didn’t fall off, did you?” roared Amos 
genially, slapping his son on his back. “Always 
modest, our Ced, always the gentleman ... but the 
best man won, I’m sure Harry’d say the same, 
wouldn’t you, eh? One falls off his broom, one stays 
on, you don’t need to be a genius to tell which one’s 
the better flier!” 

“Must be nearly time,” said Mr. Weasley quickly, 
pulling out his watch again. “Do you know whether 
we’re waiting for any more, Amos?” 

“No, the Lovegoods have been there for a week already 
and the Fawcetts couldn’t get tickets,” said Mr. 
Diggory. “There aren’t any more of us in this area, are 
there?” 

“Not that I know of,” said Mr. Weasley. “Yes, it’s a 
minute off. ... We’d better get ready. ...” 

He looked around at Harry and Hermione. 

“You just need to touch the Portkey, that’s all, a 
finger will do — ” 

With difficulty, owing to their bulky backpacks, the 
nine of them crowded around the old boot held out by 
Amos Diggory. 

They all stood there, in a tight circle, as a chill breeze 
swept over the hilltop. Nobody spoke. It suddenly 
occurred to Harry how odd this would look if a 
Muggle were to walk up here now ... nine people, two 
of them grown men, clutching this manky old boot in 
the semidarkness, waiting. ... 

“Three ...” muttered Mr. Weasley, one eye still on his 
watch, “two ... one ...” 



Page | 81 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




It happened immediately: Harry felt as though a hook 
just behind his navel had been suddenly jerked 
irresistibly forward. His feet left the ground; he could 
feel Ron and Hermione on either side of him, their 
shoulders banging into his; they were all speeding 
forward in a howl of wind and swirling color; his 
forefinger was stuck to the boot as though it was 
pulling him magnetically onward and then — 

His feet slammed into the ground; Ron staggered into 
him and he fell over; the Portkey hit the ground near 
his head with a heavy thud. 

Harry looked up. Mr. Weasley, Mr. Diggory, and 
Cedric were still standing, though looking very 
windswept; everybody else was on the ground. 

“Seven past five from Stoatshead Hill,” said a voice. 



Page | 82 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




7 




BAGMAN AND CROUCH 

Harry disentangled himself from Ron and got to his 
feet. They had arrived on what appeared to be a 
deserted stretch of misty moor. In front of them was a 
pair of tired and grumpy-looking wizards, one of 
whom was holding a large gold watch, the other a 
thick roll of parchment and a quill. Both were dressed 
as Muggles, though very inexpertly: The man with the 
watch wore a tweed suit with thigh-length galoshes; 
his colleague, a kilt and a poncho. 

“Morning, Basil,” said Mr. Weasley, picking up the 
boot and handing it to the kilted wizard, who threw it 
into a large box of used Portkeys beside him; Harry 
could see an old newspaper, an empty drinks can, 
and a punctured football. 

“Hello there, Arthur,” said Basil wearily. “Not on duty, 
eh? It’s all right for some. ... We’ve been here all 
night. ... You’d better get out of the way, we’ve got a 
big party coming in from the Black Forest at five- 
fifteen. Hang on, I’ll find your campsite. ... Weasley ... 
Weasley ...” He consulted his parchment list. “About a 
Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



quarter of a mile’s walk over there, first field you 
come to. Site manager’s called Mr. Roberts. Diggory ... 
second field ... ask for Mr. Payne.” 

“Thanks, Basil,” said Mr. Weasley, and he beckoned 
everyone to follow him. 

They set off across the deserted moor, unable to make 
out much through the mist. After about twenty 
minutes, a small stone cottage next to a gate swam 
into view. Beyond it, Harry could just make out the 
ghostly shapes of hundreds and hundreds of tents, 
rising up the gentle slope of a large field toward a 
dark wood on the horizon. They said good-bye to the 
Diggorys and approached the cottage door. 

A man was standing in the doorway, looking out at 
the tents. Harry knew at a glance that this was the 
only real Muggle for several acres. When he heard 
their footsteps, he turned his head to look at them. 

“Morning!” said Mr. Weasley brightly. 

“Morning,” said the Muggle. 

“Would you be Mr. Roberts?” 

“Aye, I would,” said Mr. Roberts. “And who’re you?” 

“Weasley — two tents, booked a couple of days ago?” 

“Aye,” said Mr. Roberts, consulting a list tacked to the 
door. “You’ve got a space up by the wood there. Just 
the one night?” 

“That’s it,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“You’ll be paying now, then?” said Mr. Roberts. 



Page | 84 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah — right — certainly — ” said Mr. Weasley. He 
retreated a short distance from the cottage and 
beckoned Harry toward him. “Help me, Harry,” he 
muttered, pulling a roll of Muggle money from his 
pocket and starting to peel the notes apart. “This 
one’s a — a — a ten? Ah yes, I see the little number 
on it now. ... So this is a five?” 

“A twenty,” Harry corrected him in an undertone, 
uncomfortably aware of Mr. Roberts trying to catch 
every word. 

“Ah yes, so it is. ... I don’t know, these little bits of 
paper ...” 

“You foreign?” said Mr. Roberts as Mr. Weasley 
returned with the correct notes. 

“Foreign?” repeated Mr. Weasley, puzzled. 

“You’re not the first one who’s had trouble with 
money,” said Mr. Roberts, scrutinizing Mr. Weasley 
closely. “I had two try and pay me with great gold 
coins the size of hubcaps ten minutes ago.” 

“Did you really?” said Mr. Weasley nervously. 

Mr. Roberts rummaged around in a tin for some 
change. 

“Never been this crowded,” he said suddenly, looking 
out over the misty field again. “Hundreds of pre- 
bookings. People usually just turn up. ...” 

“Is that right?” said Mr. Weasley, his hand held out 
for his change, but Mr. Roberts didn’t give it to him. 

“Aye,” he said thoughtfully. “People from all over. 
Loads of foreigners. And not just foreigners. Weirdos, 

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you know? There’s a bloke walking ’round in a kilt 
and a poncho.” 

“Shouldn’t he?” said Mr. Weasley anxiously. 

“It’s like some sort of ... I dunno ... like some sort of 
rally,” said Mr. Roberts. “They all seem to know each 
other. Like a big party.” 

At that moment, a wizard in plus-fours appeared out 
of thin air next to Mr. Roberts’s front door. 

“Obliviate\” he said sharply, pointing his wand at Mr. 
Roberts. 

Instantly, Mr. Roberts’s eyes slid out of focus, his 
brows unknitted, and a look of dreamy unconcern fell 
over his face. Harry recognized the symptoms of one 
who had just had his memory modified. 

“A map of the campsite for you,” Mr. Roberts said 
placidly to Mr. Weasley. “And your change.” 

“Thanks very much,” said Mr. Weasley. 

The wizard in plus-fours accompanied them toward 
the gate to the campsite. He looked exhausted: His 
chin was blue with stubble and there were deep 
purple shadows under his eyes. Once out of earshot 
of Mr. Roberts, he muttered to Mr. Weasley, “Been 
having a lot of trouble with him. Needs a Memory 
Charm ten times a day to keep him happy. And Ludo 
Bagman’s not helping. Trotting around talking about 
Bludgers and Quaffles at the top of his voice, not a 
worry about anti-Muggle security. Blimey, I’ll be glad 
when this is over. See you later, Arthur.” 

He Disapparated. 



Page | 86 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought Mr. Bagman was Head of Magical Games 
and Sports,” said Ginny, looking surprised. “He 
should know better than to talk about Bludgers near 
Muggles, shouldn’t he?” 

“He should,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling, and leading 
them through the gates into the campsite, “but Ludo’s 
always been a bit ... well ... lax about security. You 
couldn’t wish for a more enthusiastic head of the 
sports department though. He played Quidditch for 
England himself, you know. And he was the best 
Beater the Wimbourne Wasps ever had.” 

They trudged up the misty field between long rows of 
tents. Most looked almost ordinary; their owners had 
clearly tried to make them as Muggle-like as possible, 
but had slipped up by adding chimneys, or bellpulls, 
or weather vanes. However, here and there was a tent 
so obviously magical that Harry could hardly be 
surprised that Mr. Roberts was getting suspicious. 
Halfway up the field stood an extravagant confection 
of striped silk like a miniature palace, with several 
live peacocks tethered at the entrance. A little farther 
on they passed a tent that had three floors and 
several turrets; and a short way beyond that was a 
tent that had a front garden attached, complete with 
birdbath, sundial, and fountain. 

“Always the same,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling. “We 
can’t resist showing off when we get together. Ah, 
here we are, look, this is us.” 

They had reached the very edge of the wood at the top 
of the field, and here was an empty space, with a 
small sign hammered into the ground that read 
WEEZLY. 

“Couldn’t have a better spot!” said Mr. Weasley 
happily. “The field is just on the other side of the 

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




wood there, we’re as close as we could be.” He hoisted 
his backpack from his shoulders. “Right,” he said 
excitedly, “no magic allowed, strictly speaking, not 
when we’re out in these numbers on Muggle land. 
We’ll be putting these tents up by hand! Shouldn’t be 
too difficult. ... Muggles do it all the time. ... Here, 
Harry, where do you reckon we should start?” 

Harry had never been camping in his life; the 
Dursleys had never taken him on any kind of holiday, 
preferring to leave him with Mrs. Figg, an old 
neighbor. However, he and Hermione worked out 
where most of the poles and pegs should go, and 
though Mr. Weasley was more of a hindrance than a 
help, because he got thoroughly overexcited when it 
came to using the mallet, they finally managed to 
erect a pair of shabby two-man tents. 

All of them stood back to admire their handiwork. 
Nobody looking at these tents would guess they 
belonged to wizards, Harry thought, but the trouble 
was that once Bill, Charlie, and Percy arrived, they 
would be a party of ten. Hermione seemed to have 
spotted this problem too; she gave Harry a quizzical 
look as Mr. Weasley dropped to his hands and knees 
and entered the first tent. 

“Well be a bit cramped,” he called, “but I think we’ll 
all squeeze in. Come and have a look.” 

Harry bent down, ducked under the tent flap, and felt 
his jaw drop. He had walked into what looked like an 
old-fashioned, three-room flat, complete with 
bathroom and kitchen. Oddly enough, it was 
furnished in exactly the same sort of style as Mrs. 
Figg’s house: There were crocheted covers on the 
mismatched chairs and a strong smell of cats. 



Page | 88 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, it’s not for long,” said Mr. Weasley, mopping his 
bald patch with a handkerchief and peering in at the 
four bunk beds that stood in the bedroom. “I 
borrowed this from Perkins at the office. Doesn’t 
camp much anymore, poor fellow, he’s got lumbago.” 

He picked up the dusty kettle and peered inside it. 
“Well need water. ...” 

“There’s a tap marked on this map the Muggle gave 
us,” said Ron, who had followed Harry inside the tent 
and seemed completely unimpressed by its 
extraordinary inner proportions. “It’s on the other 
side of the field.” 

“Well, why don’t you, Harry, and Hermione go and get 
us some water then” — Mr. Weasley handed over the 
kettle and a couple of saucepans — “and the rest of 
us will get some wood for a fire?” 

“But we’ve got an oven,” said Ron. “Why can’t we just 



“Ron, anti-Muggle security!” said Mr. Weasley, his 
face shining with anticipation. “When real Muggles 
camp, they cook on fires outdoors. I’ve seen them at 



it! 






After a quick tour of the girls’ tent, which was slightly 
smaller than the boys’, though without the smell of 
cats, Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off across the 
campsite with the kettle and saucepans. 

Now, with the sun newly risen and the mist lifting, 
they could see the city of tents that stretched in every 
direction. They made their way slowly through the 
rows, staring eagerly around. It was only just 
dawning on Harry how many witches and wizards 



Page | 89 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




there must be in the world; he had never really 
thought much about those in other countries. 

Their fellow campers were starting to wake up. First 
to stir were the families with small children; Harry 
had never seen witches and wizards this young 
before. A tiny boy no older than two was crouched 
outside a large pyramid-shaped tent, holding a wand 
and poking happily at a slug in the grass, which was 
swelling slowly to the size of a salami. As they drew 
level with him, his mother came hurrying out of the 
tent. 

“ How ma.ny times, Kevin? You don’t — touch — 
Daddy’s — wand — yecchh!” 

She had trodden on the giant slug, which burst. Her 
scolding carried after them on the still air, mingling 
with the little boy’s yells — “You bust slug! You bust 
slug!” 

A short way farther on, they saw two little witches, 
barely older than Kevin, who were riding toy 
broomsticks that rose only high enough for the girls’ 
toes to skim the dewy grass. A Ministry wizard had 
already spotted them; as he hurried past Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione he muttered distractedly, “In broad 
daylight! Parents having a lie-in, I suppose — ” 

Here and there adult wizards and witches were 
emerging from their tents and starting to cook 
breakfast. Some, with furtive looks around them, 
conjured fires with their wands; others were striking 
matches with dubious looks on their faces, as though 
sure this couldn’t work. Three African wizards sat in 
serious conversation, all of them wearing long white 
robes and roasting what looked like a rabbit on a 
bright purple fire, while a group of middle-aged 
American witches sat gossiping happily beneath a 
Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




spangled banner stretched between their tents that 
read: THE SALEM WITCHES’ INSTITUTE. Harry 
caught snatches of conversation in strange languages 
from the inside of tents they passed, and though he 
couldn’t understand a word, the tone of every single 
voice was excited. 

“Er — is it my eyes, or has everything gone green?” 
said Ron. 

It wasn’t just Ron’s eyes. They had walked into a 
patch of tents that were all covered with a thick 
growth of shamrocks, so that it looked as though 
small, oddly shaped hillocks had sprouted out of the 
earth. Grinning faces could be seen under those that 
had their flaps open. Then, from behind them, they 
heard their names. 

“Harry! Ron! Hermione!” 

It was Seamus Finnigan, their fellow Gryffindor fourth 
year. He was sitting in front of his own shamrock- 
covered tent, with a sandy-haired woman who had to 
be his mother, and his best friend, Dean Thomas, 
also of Gryffindor. 

“Like the decorations?” said Seamus, grinning. “The 
Ministry’s not too happy.” 

“Ah, why shouldn’t we show our colors?” said Mrs. 
Finnigan. “You should see what the Bulgarians have 
got dangling all over their tents. You’ll be supporting 
Ireland, of course?” she added, eyeing Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione beadily. When they had assured her 
that they were indeed supporting Ireland, they set off 
again, though, as Ron said, “Like we’d say anything 
else surrounded by that lot.” 



Page | 91 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I wonder what the Bulgarians have got dangling all 
over their tents?” said Hermione. 

“Let’s go and have a look,” said Harry, pointing to a 
large patch of tents upheld, where the Bulgarian flag 
— white, green, and red — was fluttering in the 
breeze. 

The tents here had not been bedecked with plant life, 
but each and every one of them had the same poster 
attached to it, a poster of a very surly face with heavy 
black eyebrows. The picture was, of course, moving, 
but all it did was blink and scowl. 

“Krum,” said Ron quietly. 

“What?” said Hermione. 

“Krum!” said Ron. “Viktor Krum, the Bulgarian 
Seeker!” 

“He looks really grumpy,” said Hermione, looking 
around at the many Krums blinking and scowling at 
them. 

“ ‘Really grumpy’?” Ron raised his eyes to the 
heavens. “Who cares what he looks like? He’s 
unbelievable. He’s really young too. Only just eighteen 
or something. He’s a genius, you wait until tonight, 
you’ll see.” 

There was already a small queue for the tap in the 
corner of the field. Harry, Ron, and Hermione joined 
it, right behind a pair of men who were having a 
heated argument. One of them was a very old wizard 
who was wearing a long flowery nightgown. The other 
was clearly a Ministry wizard; he was holding out a 
pair of pinstriped trousers and almost crying with 
exasperation. 

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Just put them on, Archie, there’s a good chap. You 
can’t walk around like that, the Muggle at the gate’s 
already getting suspicious — ” 

“I bought this in a Muggle shop,” said the old wizard 
stubbornly. “Muggles wear them.” 

“Muggle women wear them, Archie, not the men, they 
wear these,” said the Ministry wizard, and he 
brandished the pinstriped trousers. 

“I’m not putting them on,” said old Archie in 
indignation. “I like a healthy breeze ’round my 
privates, thanks.” 

Hermione was overcome with such a strong fit of the 
giggles at this point that she had to duck out of the 
queue and only returned when Archie had collected 
his water and moved away. 

Walking more slowly now, because of the weight of 
the water, they made their way back through the 
campsite. Here and there, they saw more familiar 
faces: other Hogwarts students with their families. 
Oliver Wood, the old captain of Harry’s House 
Quidditch team, who had just left Hogwarts, dragged 
Harry over to his parents’ tent to introduce him, and 
told him excitedly that he had just been signed to the 
Puddlemere United reserve team. Next they were 
hailed by Ernie Macmillan, a Hufflepuff fourth year, 
and a little farther on they saw Cho Chang, a very 
pretty girl who played Seeker on the Ravenclaw team. 
She waved and smiled at Harry, who slopped quite a 
lot of water down his front as he waved back. More to 
stop Ron from smirking than anything, Harry 
hurriedly pointed out a large group of teenagers 
whom he had never seen before. 



Page | 93 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Who d’you reckon they are?” he said. “They don’t go 
to Hogwarts, do they?” 



“ ’Spect they go to some foreign school,” said Ron. “I 
know there are others. Never met anyone who went to 
one, though. Bill had a penfriend at a school in Brazil 
. . . this was years and years ago . . . and he wanted to 
go on an exchange trip but Mum and Dad couldn’t 
afford it. His penfriend got all offended when he said 
he wasn’t going and sent him a cursed hat. It made 
his ears shrivel up.” 

Harry laughed but didn’t voice the amazement he felt 
at hearing about other wizarding schools. He 
supposed, now that he saw representatives of so 
many nationalities in the campsite, that he had been 
stupid never to realize that Hogwarts couldn’t be the 
only one. He glanced at Hermione, who looked utterly 
unsurprised by the information. No doubt she had 
run across the news about other wizarding schools in 
some book or other. 

“You’ve been ages,” said George when they finally got 
back to the Weasleys’ tents. 

“Met a few people,” said Ron, setting the water down. 
“You not got that fire started yet?” 

“Dad’s having fun with the matches,” said Fred. 

Mr. Weasley was having no success at all in lighting 
the fire, but it wasn’t for lack of trying. Splintered 
matches littered the ground around him, but he 
looked as though he was having the time of his life. 

“Oops!” he said as he managed to light a match and 
promptly dropped it in surprise. 



Page | 94 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come here, Mr. Weasley,” said Hermione kindly, 
taking the box from him, and showing him how to do 
it properly. 

At last they got the fire lit, though it was at least 
another hour before it was hot enough to cook 
anything. There was plenty to watch while they 
waited, however. Their tent seemed to be pitched right 
alongside a kind of thoroughfare to the field, and 
Ministry members kept hurrying up and down it, 
greeting Mr. Weasley cordially as they passed. Mr. 
Weasley kept up a running commentary, mainly for 
Harry’s and Hermione’s benefit; his own children 
knew too much about the Ministry to be greatly 
interested. 

“That was Cuthbert Mockridge, Head of the Goblin 
Liaison Office. ... Here comes Gilbert Wimple; he’s 
with the Committee on Experimental Charms; he’s 
had those horns for awhile now. ... Hello, Arnie ... 
Arnold Peasegood, he’s an Obliviator — member of the 
Accidental Magic Reversal Squad, you know. ... and 
that’s Bode and Croaker ... they’re Unspeakables. ...” 

“They’re what?” 

“From the Department of Mysteries, top secret, no 
idea what they get up to. ...” 

At last, the fire was ready, and they had just started 
cooking eggs and sausages when Bill, Charlie, and 
Percy came strolling out of the woods toward them. 

“Just Apparated, Dad,” said Percy loudly. “Ah, 
excellent, lunch!” 

They were halfway through their plates of eggs and 
sausages when Mr. Weasley jumped to his feet, 
waving and grinning at a man who was striding 

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




toward them. “Aha!” he said. “The man of the 
moment! Ludo!” 

Ludo Bagman was easily the most noticeable person 
Harry had seen so far, even including old Archie in 
his flowered nightdress. He was wearing long 
Quidditch robes in thick horizontal stripes of bright 
yellow and black. An enormous picture of a wasp was 
splashed across his chest. He had the look of a 
powerfully built man gone slightly to seed; the robes 
were stretched tightly across a large belly he surely 
had not had in the days when he had played 
Quidditch for England. His nose was squashed 
(probably broken by a stray Bludger, Harry thought), 
but his round blue eyes, short blond hair, and rosy 
complexion made him look like a very overgrown 
schoolboy. 

“Ahoy there!” Bagman called happily. He was walking 
as though he had springs attached to the balls of his 
feet and was plainly in a state of wild excitement. 

“Arthur, old man,” he puffed as he reached the 
campfire, “what a day, eh? What a day! Could we 
have asked for more perfect weather? A cloudless 
night coming . . . and hardly a hiccough in the 
arrangements. ... Not much for me to do!” 

Behind him, a group of haggard-looking Ministry 
wizards rushed past, pointing at the distant evidence 
of some sort of a magical fire that was sending violet 
sparks twenty feet into the air. 

Percy hurried forward with his hand outstretched. 
Apparently his disapproval of the way Ludo Bagman 
ran his department did not prevent him from wanting 
to make a good impression. 



Page | 96 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah — yes,” said Mr. Weasley, grinning, “this is my 
son Percy. He’s just started at the Ministry — and 
this is Fred — no, George, sorry — that’s Fred — Bill, 
Charlie, Ron — my daughter, Ginny — and Ron’s 
friends, Hermione Granger and Harry Potter.” 

Bagman did the smallest of double takes when he 
heard Harry’s name, and his eyes performed the 
familiar flick upward to the scar on Harry’s forehead. 

“Everyone,” Mr. Weasley continued, “this is Ludo 
Bagman, you know who he is, it’s thanks to him we’ve 
got such good tickets — ” 

Bagman beamed and waved his hand as if to say it 
had been nothing. 

“Fancy a flutter on the match, Arthur?” he said 
eagerly, jingling what seemed to be a large amount of 
gold in the pockets of his yellow-and-black robes. “I’ve 
already got Roddy Pontner betting me Bulgaria will 
score first — I offered him nice odds, considering 
Ireland’s front three are the strongest I’ve seen in 
years — and little Agatha Timms has put up half 
shares in her eel farm on a week-long match.” 

“Oh ... go on then,” said Mr. Weasley. “Let’s see ... a 
Galleon on Ireland to win?” 

“A Galleon?” Ludo Bagman looked slightly 
disappointed, but recovered himself. “Very well, very 
well . . . any other takers?” 

“They’re a bit young to be gambling,” said Mr. 

Weasley. “Molly wouldn’t like — ” 

“Well bet thirty-seven Galleons, fifteen Sickles, three 
Knuts,” said Fred as he and George quickly pooled all 



Page | 97 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




their money, “that Ireland wins — but Viktor Krum 
gets the Snitch. Oh and we’ll throw in a fake wand.” 



“You don’t want to go showing Mr. Bagman rubbish 
like that — ” Percy hissed, but Bagman didn’t seem to 
think the wand was rubbish at all; on the contrary, 
his boyish face shone with excitement as he took it 
from Fred, and when the wand gave a loud squawk 
and turned into a rubber chicken, Bagman roared 
with laughter. 

“Excellent! I haven’t seen one that convincing in 
years! I’d pay five Galleons for that!” 

Percy froze in an attitude of stunned disapproval. 

“Boys,” said Mr. Weasley under his breath, “I don’t 
want you betting. ... That’s all your savings. ... Your 
mother — ” 

“Don’t be a spoilsport, Arthur!” boomed Ludo 
Bagman, rattling his pockets excitedly. “They’re old 
enough to know what they want! You reckon Ireland 
will win but Krum ’ll get the Snitch? Not a chance, 
boys, not a chance. ... I’ll give you excellent odds on 
that one. ... We’ll add five Galleons for the funny 
wand, then, shall we. ...” 

Mr. Weasley looked on helplessly as Ludo Bagman 
whipped out a notebook and quill and began jotting 
down the twins’ names. 

“Cheers,” said George, taking the slip of parchment 
Bagman handed him and tucking it away carefully. 
Bagman turned most cheerfully back to Mr. Weasley. 

“Couldn’t do me a brew, I suppose? I’m keeping an 
eye out for Barty Crouch. My Bulgarian opposite 
number’s making difficulties, and I can’t understand 

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




a word he’s saying. Barty’ll be able to sort it out. He 
speaks about a hundred and fifty languages.” 

“Mr. Crouch?” said Percy, suddenly abandoning his 
look of poker-stiff disapproval and positively writhing 
with excitement. “He speaks over two hundred! 
Mermish and Gobbledegook and Troll ...” 

“Anyone can speak Troll,” said Fred dismissively. “All 
you have to do is point and grunt.” 

Percy threw Fred an extremely nasty look and stoked 
the fire vigorously to bring the kettle back to the boil. 

“Any news of Bertha Jorkins yet, Ludo?” Mr. Weasley 
asked as Bagman settled himself down on the grass 
beside them all. 

“Not a dicky bird,” said Bagman comfortably. “But 
she’ll turn up. Poor old Bertha ... memory like a leaky 
cauldron and no sense of direction. Lost, you take my 
word for it. She’ll wander back into the office 
sometime in October, thinking it’s still July.” 

“You don’t think it might be time to send someone to 
look for her?” Mr. Weasley suggested tentatively as 
Percy handed Bagman his tea. 

“Barty Crouch keeps saying that,” said Bagman, his 
round eyes widening innocently, “but we really can’t 
spare anyone at the moment. Oh — talk of the devil! 
Barty!” 

A wizard had just Apparated at their fireside, and he 
could not have made more of a contrast with Ludo 
Bagman, sprawled on the grass in his old Wasp 
robes. Barty Crouch was a stiff, upright, elderly man, 
dressed in an impeccably crisp suit and tie. The 
parting in his short gray hair was almost unnaturally 
Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




straight, and his narrow toothbrush mustache looked 
as though he trimmed it using a slide rule. His shoes 
were very highly polished. Harry could see at once 
why Percy idolized him. Percy was a great believer in 
rigidly following rules, and Mr. Crouch had complied 
with the rule about Muggle dressing so thoroughly 
that he could have passed for a bank manager; Harry 
doubted even Uncle Vernon would have spotted him 
for what he really was. 

“Pull up a bit of grass, Barty,” said Ludo brightly, 
patting the ground beside him. 

“No thank you, Ludo,” said Crouch, and there was a 
bite of impatience in his voice. “I’ve been looking for 
you everywhere. The Bulgarians are insisting we add 
another twelve seats to the Top Box.” 

“Oh is that what they’re after?” said Bagman. “I 
thought the chap was asking to borrow a pair of 
tweezers. Bit of a strong accent.” 

“Mr. Crouch!” said Percy breathlessly, sunk into a 
kind of half-bow that made him look like a 
hunchback. “Would you like a cup of tea?” 

“Oh,” said Mr. Crouch, looking over at Percy in mild 
surprise. “Yes — thank you, Weatherby.” 

Fred and George choked into their own cups. Percy, 
very pink around the ears, busied himself with the 
kettle. 

“Oh and I’ve been wanting a word with you too, 
Arthur,” said Mr. Crouch, his sharp eyes falling upon 
Mr. Weasley. “Ali Bashir’s on the warpath. He wants a 
word with you about your embargo on flying carpets.” 

Mr. Weasley heaved a deep sigh. 

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I sent him an owl about that just last week. If I’ve 
told him once I’ve told him a hundred times: Carpets 
are defined as a Muggle Artifact by the Registry of 
Proscribed Charmable Objects, but will he listen?” 

“I doubt it,” said Mr. Crouch, accepting a cup from 
Percy. “He’s desperate to export here.” 

“Well, they’ll never replace brooms in Britain, will 
they?” said Bagman. 

“Ali thinks there’s a niche in the market for a family 
vehicle,” said Mr. Crouch. “I remember my 
grandfather had an Axminster that could seat twelve 
— but that was before carpets were banned, of 
course.” 

He spoke as though he wanted to leave nobody in any 
doubt that all his ancestors had abided strictly by the 
law. 

“So, been keeping busy, Barty?” said Bagman 
breezily. 

“Fairly,” said Mr. Crouch dryly. “Organizing Portkeys 
across five continents is no mean feat, Ludo.” 

“I expect you’ll both be glad when this is over?” said 
Mr. Weasley. 

Ludo Bagman looked shocked. 

“Glad! Don’t know when I’ve had more fun. ... Still, 
it’s not as though we haven’t got anything to look 
forward to, eh, Barty? Eh? Plenty left to organize, eh?” 

Mr. Crouch raised his eyebrows at Bagman. 



Page | 101 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“We agreed not to make the announcement until all 
the details — ” 

“Oh details!” said Bagman, waving the word away like 
a cloud of midges. “They’ve signed, haven’t they? 
They’ve agreed, haven’t they? I bet you anything these 
kids’ll know soon enough anyway. I mean, it’s 
happening at Hogwarts — ” 

“Ludo, we need to meet the Bulgarians, you know,” 
said Mr. Crouch sharply, cutting Bagman’s remarks 
short. “Thank you for the tea, Weatherby.” 

He pushed his undrunk tea back at Percy and waited 
for Ludo to rise; Bagman struggled to his feet, 
swigging down the last of his tea, the gold in his 
pockets chinking merrily. 

“See you all later!” he said. “You’ll be up in the Top 
Box with me — I’m commentating!” He waved, Barty 
Crouch nodded curtly, and both of them 
Disapparated. 

“What’s happening at Hogwarts, Dad?” said Fred at 
once. “What were they talking about?” 

“You’ll find out soon enough,” said Mr.Weasley, 
smiling. 

“It’s classified information, until such time as the 
Ministry decides to release it,” said Percy stiffly. “Mr. 
Crouch was quite right not to disclose it.” 

“Oh shut up, Weatherby,” said Fred. 

A sense of excitement rose like a palpable cloud over 
the campsite as the afternoon wore on. By dusk, the 
still summer air itself seemed to be quivering with 
anticipation, and as darkness spread like a curtain 

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




over the thousands of waiting wizards, the last 
vestiges of pretence disappeared: the Ministry seemed 
to have bowed to the inevitable and stopped fighting 
the signs of blatant magic now breaking out 
everywhere. 

Salesmen were Apparating every few feet, carrying 
trays and pushing carts full of extraordinary 
merchandise. There were luminous rosettes — green 
for Ireland, red for Bulgaria — which were squealing 
the names of the players, pointed green hats 
bedecked with dancing shamrocks, Bulgarian scarves 
adorned with lions that really roared, flags from both 
countries that played their national anthems as they 
were waved; there were tiny models of Firebolts that 
really flew, and collectible figures of famous players, 
which strolled across the palm of your hand, preening 
themselves. 

“Been saving my pocket money all summer for this,” 
Ron told Harry as they and Hermione strolled through 
the salesmen, buying souvenirs. Though Ron 
purchased a dancing shamrock hat and a large green 
rosette, he also bought a small figure of Viktor Krum, 
the Bulgarian Seeker. The miniature Krum walked 
backward and forward over Ron’s hand, scowling up 
at the green rosette above him. 

“Wow, look at these!” said Harry, hurrying over to a 
cart piled high with what looked like brass 
binoculars, except that they were covered with all 
sorts of weird knobs and dials. 

“Omnioculars,” said the saleswizard eagerly. “You can 
replay action . . . slow everything down . . . and they 
flash up a play-by-play breakdown if you need it. 
Bargain — ten Galleons each.” 



Page | 103 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Wish I hadn’t bought this now,” said Ron, gesturing 
at his dancing shamrock hat and gazing longingly at 
the Omnioculars. 

“Three pairs,” said Harry firmly to the wizard. 

“No — don’t bother,” said Ron, going red. He was 
always touchy about the fact that Harry, who had 
inherited a small fortune from his parents, had much 
more money than he did. 

“You won’t be getting anything for Christmas,” Harry 
told him, thrusting Omnioculars into his and 
Hermione’s hands. “For about ten years, mind.” 

“Fair enough,” said Ron, grinning. 

“Oooh, thanks, Harry,” said Hermione. “And I’ll get us 
some programs, look — ” 

Their money bags considerably lighter, they went 
back to the tents. Bill, Charlie, and Ginny were all 
sporting green rosettes too, and Mr. Weasley was 
carrying an Irish flag. Fred and George had no 
souvenirs as they had given Bagman all their gold. 

And then a deep, booming gong sounded somewhere 
beyond the woods, and at once, green and red 
lanterns blazed into life in the trees, lighting a path to 
the field. 

“It’s time!” said Mr. Weasley, looking as excited as any 
of them. “Come on, let’s go!” 



Page | 104 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 





-4 



THE QUIDDITCH WORLD CUP 

Clutching their purchases, Mr. Weasley in the lead, 
they all hurried into the wood, following the lantern- 
lit trail. They could hear the sounds of thousands of 
people moving around them, shouts and laughter, 
snatches of singing. The atmosphere of feverish 
excitement was highly infectious; Harry couldn’t stop 
grinning. They walked through the wood for twenty 
minutes, talking and joking loudly, until at last they 
emerged on the other side and found themselves in 
the shadow of a gigantic stadium. Though Harry 
could see only a fraction of the immense gold walls 
surrounding the field, he could tell that ten 
cathedrals would fit comfortably inside it. 

“Seats a hundred thousand,” said Mr. Weasley, 
spotting the awestruck look on Harry’s face. “Ministry 
task force of five hundred have been working on it all 
year. Muggle Repelling Charms on every inch of it. 
Every time Muggles have got anywhere near here all 
year, they’ve suddenly remembered urgent 
appointments and had to dash away again . . . bless 
them,” he added fondly, leading the way toward the 
Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




nearest entrance, which was already surrounded by a 
swarm of shouting witches and wizards. 

“Prime seats!” said the Ministry witch at the entrance 
when she checked their tickets. “Top Box! Straight 
upstairs, Arthur, and as high as you can go.” 

The stairs into the stadium were carpeted in rich 
purple. They clambered upward with the rest of the 
crowd, which slowly filtered away through doors into 
the stands to their left and right. Mr. Weasley’s party 
kept climbing, and at last they reached the top of the 
staircase and found themselves in a small box, set at 
the highest point of the stadium and situated exactly 
halfway between the golden goal posts. About twenty 
purple-and-gilt chairs stood in two rows here, and 
Harry, filing into the front seats with the Weasleys, 
looked down upon a scene the likes of which he could 
never have imagined. 

A hundred thousand witches and wizards were taking 
their places in the seats, which rose in levels around 
the long oval field. Everything was suffused with a 
mysterious golden light, which seemed to come from 
the stadium itself. The field looked smooth as velvet 
from their lofty position. At either end of the field 
stood three goal hoops, fifty feet high; right opposite 
them, almost at Harry’s eye level, was a gigantic 
blackboard. Gold writing kept dashing across it as 
though an invisible giant’s hand were scrawling upon 
the blackboard and then wiping it off again; watching 
it, Harry saw that it was flashing advertisements 
across the field. 

The Bluebottle: A Broom for All the Family — safe, 
reliable, and with Built-in Anti-Burglar Buzzer ... Mrs. 
Skower’s All-Purpose Magical Mess Remover: No Pain, 
No Stain! ... Gladrags Wizardwear — London, Paris, 
Hogsmeade ... 

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry tore his eyes away from the sign and looked 
over his shoulder to see who else was sharing the box 
with them. So far it was empty, except for a tiny 
creature sitting in the second from last seat at the 
end of the row behind them. The creature, whose legs 
were so short they stuck out in front of it on the 
chair, was wearing a tea towel draped like a toga, and 
it had its face hidden in its hands. Yet those long, 
batlike ears were oddly familiar. . . . 

“ Dobby ?” said Harry incredulously. 

The tiny creature looked up and stretched its fingers, 
revealing enormous brown eyes and a nose the exact 
size and shape of a large tomato. It wasn’t Dobby — it 
was, however, unmistakably a house-elf, as Harry’s 
friend Dobby had been. Harry had set Dobby free 
from his old owners, the Malfoy family. 

“Did sir just call me Dobby?” squeaked the elf 
curiously from between its fingers. Its voice was 
higher even than Dobby’s had been, a teeny, 
quivering squeak of a voice, and Harry suspected — 
though it was very hard to tell with a house-elf — that 
this one might just be female. Ron and Hermione 
spun around in their seats to look. Though they had 
heard a lot about Dobby from Harry, they had never 
actually met him. Even Mr. Weasley looked around in 
interest. 

“Sorry,” Harry told the elf, “I just thought you were 
someone I knew.” 

“But I knows Dobby too, sir!” squeaked the elf. She 
was shielding her face, as though blinded by light, 
though the Top Box was not brightly lit. “My name is 
Winky, sir — and you, sir — ” Her dark brown eyes 
widened to the size of side plates as they rested upon 
Harry’s scar. “You is surely Harry Potter!” 

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, I am,” said Harry. 



“But Dobby talks of you all the time, sir!” she said, 
lowering her hands very slightly and looking 
awestruck. 

“How is he?” said Harry. “How’s freedom suiting 
him?” 

“Ah, sir,” said Winky, shaking her head, “ah sir, 
meaning no disrespect, sir, but I is not sure you did 
Dobby a favor, sir, when you is setting him free.” 

“Why?” said Harry, taken aback. “What’s wrong with 
him?” 

“Freedom is going to Dobby’s head, sir,” said Winky 
sadly. “Ideas above his station, sir. Can’t get another 
position, sir.” 

“Why not?” said Harry. 

Winky lowered her voice by a half-octave and 
whispered, “He is wanting paying for his work, sir.” 

“Paying?” said Harry blankly. “Well — why shouldn’t 
he be paid?” 

Winky looked quite horrified at the idea and closed 
her fingers slightly so that her face was half-hidden 
again. 

“House-elves is not paid, sir!” she said in a muffled 
squeak. “No, no, no. I says to Dobby, I says, go find 
yourself a nice family and settle down, Dobby. He is 
getting up to all sorts of high jinks, sir, what is 
unbecoming to a house-elf. You goes racketing 
around like this, Dobby, I says, and next thing I hear 
you’s up in front of the Department for the Regulation 
Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and Control of Magical Creatures, like some common 
goblin.” 

“Well, it’s about time he had a bit of fun,” said Harry. 

“House-elves is not supposed to have fun, Harry 
Potter,” said Winky firmly, from behind her hands. 
“House-elves does what they is told. I is not liking 
heights at all, Harry Potter” — she glanced toward the 
edge of the box and gulped — “but my master sends 
me to the Top Box and I comes, sir.” 

“Why’s he sent you up here, if he knows you don’t like 
heights?” said Harry, frowning. 

“Master — master wants me to save him a seat, Harry 
Potter. He is very busy,” said Winky, tilting her head 
toward the empty space beside her. “Winky is wishing 
she is back in master’s tent, Harry Potter, but Winky 
does what she is told. Winky is a good house-elf.” 

She gave the edge of the box another frightened look 
and hid her eyes completely again. Harry turned back 
to the others. 

“So that’s a house-elf?” Ron muttered. “Weird things, 
aren’t they?” 

“Dobby was weirder,” said Harry fervently. 

Ron pulled out his Omnioculars and started testing 
them, staring down into the crowd on the other side 
of the stadium. 

“Wild!” he said, twiddling the replay knob on the side. 
“I can make that old bloke down there pick his nose 
again ... and again ... and again ...” 



Page | 109 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione, meanwhile, was skimming eagerly through 
her velvet-covered, tasseled program. 



“ ‘A display from the team mascots will precede the 
match,’ ” she read aloud. 

“Oh that’s always worth watching,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“National teams bring creatures from their native 
land, you know, to put on a bit of a show.” 

The box filled gradually around them over the next 
half hour. Mr. Weasley kept shaking hands with 
people who were obviously very important wizards. 
Percy jumped to his feet so often that he looked as 
though he were trying to sit on a hedgehog. When 
Cornelius Fudge, the Minister of Magic himself, 
arrived, Percy bowed so low that his glasses fell off 
and shattered. Highly embarrassed, he repaired them 
with his wand and thereafter remained in his seat, 
throwing jealous looks at Harry, whom Cornelius 
Fudge had greeted like an old friend. They had met 
before, and Fudge shook Harry’s hand in a fatherly 
fashion, asked how he was, and introduced him to 
the wizards on either side of him. 

“Harry Potter, you know,” he told the Bulgarian 
minister loudly, who was wearing splendid robes of 
black velvet trimmed with gold and didn’t seem to 
understand a word of English. “Harry Potter ... oh 
come on now, you know who he is . . . the boy who 
survived You-Know-Who ... you do know who he is — ” 

The Bulgarian wizard suddenly spotted Harry’s scar 
and started gabbling loudly and excitedly, pointing at 
it. 

“Knew we’d get there in the end,” said Fudge wearily 
to Harry. “I’m no great shakes at languages; I need 
Barty Crouch for this sort of thing. Ah, I see his 

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




house-elf’s saving him a seat. ... Good job too, these 
Bulgarian blighters have been trying to cadge all the 
best places ... ah, and here’s Lucius!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned quickly. Edging 
along the second row to three still-empty seats right 
behind Mr. Weasley were none other than Dobby the 
house-elf’s former owners: Lucius Malfoy; his son, 
Draco; and a woman Harry supposed must be Draco’s 
mother. 

Harry and Draco Malfoy had been enemies ever since 
their very first journey to Hogwarts. A pale boy with a 
pointed face and white-blond hair, Draco greatly 
resembled his father. His mother was blonde too; tall 
and slim, she would have been nice-looking if she 
hadn’t been wearing a look that suggested there was 
a nasty smell under her nose. 

“Ah, Fudge,” said Mr. Malfoy, holding out his hand as 
he reached the Minister of Magic. “How are you? I 
don’t think you’ve met my wife, Narcissa? Or our son, 
Draco?” 

“How do you do, how do you do?” said Fudge, smiling 
and bowing to Mrs. Malfoy. “And allow me to 
introduce you to Mr. Oblansk — Obalonsk — Mr. — 
well, he’s the Bulgarian Minister of Magic, and he 
can’t understand a word I’m saying anyway, so never 
mind. And let’s see who else — you know Arthur 
Weasley, I daresay?” 

It was a tense moment. Mr. Weasley and Mr. Malfoy 
looked at each other and Harry vividly recalled the 
last time they had come face-to-face: It had been in 
Flourish and Blotts’ bookshop, and they had had a 
fight. Mr. Malfoy’s cold gray eyes swept over Mr. 
Weasley, and then up and down the row. 



Page | 111 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Good lord, Arthur,” he said softly. “What did you 
have to sell to get seats in the Top Box? Surely your 
house wouldn’t have fetched this much?” 

Fudge, who wasn’t listening, said, “Lucius has just 
given a very generous contribution to St. Mungo’s 
Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries, Arthur. 
He’s here as my guest.” 

“How — how nice,” said Mr. Weasley, with a very 
strained smile. 

Mr. Malfoy’s eyes had returned to Hermione, who 
went slightly pink, but stared determinedly back at 
him. Harry knew exactly what was making Mr. 
Malfoy’s lip curl like that. The Malfoys prided 
themselves on being purebloods; in other words, they 
considered anyone of Muggle descent, like Hermione, 
second-class. However, under the gaze of the Minister 
of Magic, Mr. Malfoy didn’t dare say anything. He 
nodded sneeringly to Mr. Weasley and continued 
down the line to his seats. Draco shot Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione one contemptuous look, then settled 
himself between his mother and father. 

“Slimy gits,” Ron muttered as he, Harry, and 
Hermione turned to face the field again. Next 
moment, Ludo Bagman charged into the box. 

“Everyone ready?” he said, his round face gleaming 
like a great, excited Edam. “Minister — ready to go?” 

“Ready when you are, Ludo,” said Fudge comfortably. 

Ludo whipped out his wand, directed it at his own 
throat, and said “Sonorusl” and then spoke over the 
roar of sound that was now filling the packed 
stadium; his voice echoed over them, booming into 
every corner of the stands. 

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ladies and gentlemen ... welcome! Welcome to the 
final of the four hundred and twenty-second 
Quidditch World Cup!” 

The spectators screamed and clapped. Thousands of 
flags waved, adding their discordant national 
anthems to the racket. The huge blackboard opposite 
them was wiped clear of its last message (Bertie Bott’s 
Every Flavor Beans — A Risk With Every Mouthfull) 
and now showed BULGARIA: 0, IRELAND: 0. 

“And now, without further ado, allow me to introduce 
... the Bulgarian National Team Mascots!” 

The right-hand side of the stands, which was a solid 
block of scarlet, roared its approval. 

“I wonder what they’ve brought,” said Mr. Weasley, 
leaning forward in his seat. “Aaah!” He suddenly 
whipped off his glasses and polished them hurriedly 
on his robes. “Veelal” 

“What are veel — ?” 

But a hundred veela were now gliding out onto the 
field, and Harry’s question was answered for him. 
Veela were women . . . the most beautiful women Harry 
had ever seen ... except that they weren’t — they 
couldn’t be — human. This puzzled Harry for a 
moment while he tried to guess what exactly they 
could be; what could make their skin shine moon- 
bright like that, or their white-gold hair fan out 
behind them without wind . . . but then the music 
started, and Harry stopped worrying about them not 
being human — in fact, he stopped worrying about 
anything at all. 

The veela had started to dance, and Harry’s mind had 
gone completely and blissfully blank. All that 

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




mattered in the world was that he kept watching the 
veela, because if they stopped dancing, terrible things 
would happen. ... 

And as the veela danced faster and faster, wild, half- 
formed thoughts started chasing through Harry’s 
dazed mind. He wanted to do something very 
impressive, right now. Jumping from the box into the 
stadium seemed a good idea . . . but would it be good 
enough? 

“Harry, what are you doing?” said Hermione’s voice 
from a long way off. 

The music stopped. Harry blinked. He was standing 
up, and one of his legs was resting on the wall of the 
box. Next to him, Ron was frozen in an attitude that 
looked as though he were about to dive from a 
springboard. 

Angry yells were filling the stadium. The crowd didn’t 
want the veela to go. Harry was with them; he would, 
of course, be supporting Bulgaria, and he wondered 
vaguely why he had a large green shamrock pinned to 
his chest. Ron, meanwhile, was absent-mindedly 
shredding the shamrocks on his hat. Mr. Weasley, 
smiling slightly, leaned over to Ron and tugged the 
hat out of his hands. 

“You’ll be wanting that,” he said, “once Ireland have 
had their say.” 

“Huh?” said Ron, staring openmouthed at the veela, 
who had now lined up along one side of the field. 

Hermione made a loud tutting noise. She reached up 
and pulled Harry back into his seat. “Honestlyl” she 
said. 



Page | 114 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And now,” roared Ludo Bagman’s voice, “kindly put 
your wands in the air ... for the Irish National Team 
Mascots!” 

Next moment, what seemed to be a great green-and- 
gold comet came zooming into the stadium. It did one 
circuit of the stadium, then split into two smaller 
comets, each hurtling toward the goal posts. A 
rainbow arced suddenly across the field, connecting 
the two balls of light. The crowd oooohed and 
aaaaahed, as though at a fireworks display. Now the 
rainbow faded and the balls of light reunited and 
merged; they had formed a great shimmering 
shamrock, which rose up into the sky and began to 
soar over the stands. Something like golden rain 
seemed to be falling from it — 

“Excellent!” yelled Ron as the shamrock soared over 
them, and heavy gold coins rained from it, bouncing 
off their heads and seats. Squinting up at the 
shamrock, Harry realized that it was actually 
comprised of thousands of tiny little bearded men 
with red vests, each carrying a minute lamp of gold or 
green. 

“Leprechauns!” said Mr. Weasley over the tumultuous 
applause of the crowd, many of whom were still 
fighting and rummaging around under their chairs to 
retrieve the gold. 

“There you go,” Ron yelled happily, stuffing a fistful of 
gold coins into Harry’s hand, “for the Omnioculars! 
Now you’ve got to buy me a Christmas present, ha!” 

The great shamrock dissolved, the leprechauns 
drifted down onto the field on the opposite side from 
the veela, and settled themselves cross-legged to 
watch the match. 



Page | 115 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And now, ladies and gentlemen, kindly welcome — 
the Bulgarian National Quidditch Team! I give you — 
Dimitrov!” 

A scarlet-clad figure on a broomstick, moving so fast 
it was blurred, shot out onto the field from an 
entrance far below, to wild applause from the 
Bulgarian supporters. 

“Ivanova!” 

A second scarlet-robed player zoomed out. 

“Zograf! Levski! Vulchanov! Volkov! Aaaaaaand — 
Krum\” 

“That’s him, that’s him!” yelled Ron, following Krum 
with his Omnioculars. Harry quickly focused his own. 

Viktor Krum was thin, dark, and sallow-skinned, with 
a large curved nose and thick black eyebrows. He 
looked like an overgrown bird of prey. It was hard to 
believe he was only eighteen. 

“And now, please greet — the Irish National Quidditch 
Team!” yelled Bagman. “Presenting — Connolly! Ryan! 
Troy! Mullet! Moran! Quigley! Aaaaaand — Lynch).” 

Seven green blurs swept onto the field; Harry spun a 
small dial on the side of his Omnioculars and slowed 
the players down enough to read the word “Firebolt” 
on each of their brooms and see their names, 
embroidered in silver, upon their backs. 

“And here, all the way from Egypt, our referee, 
acclaimed Chairwizard of the International 
Association of Quidditch, Hassan Mostafa!” 



Page | 116 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A small and skinny wizard, completely bald but with 
a mustache to rival Uncle Vernon’s, wearing robes of 
pure gold to match the stadium, strode out onto the 
field. A silver whistle was protruding from under the 
mustache, and he was carrying a large wooden crate 
under one arm, his broomstick under the other. 

Harry spun the speed dial on his Omnioculars back 
to normal, watching closely as Mostafa mounted his 
broomstick and kicked the crate open — four balls 
burst into the air: the scarlet Quaffle, the two black 
Bludgers, and (Harry saw it for the briefest moment, 
before it sped out of sight) the minuscule, winged 
Golden Snitch. With a sharp blast on his whistle, 
Mostafa shot into the air after the balls. 

“Theeeeeeeey’re OFF!” screamed Bagman. “And it’s 
Mullet! Troy! Moran! Dimitrov! Back to Mullet! Troy! 
Levski! Moran!” 

It was Quidditch as Harry had never seen it played 
before. He was pressing his Omnioculars so hard to 
his glasses that they were cutting into the bridge of 
his nose. The speed of the players was incredible — 
the Chasers were throwing the Quaffle to one another 
so fast that Bagman only had time to say their 
names. Harry spun the slow dial on the right of his 
Omnioculars again, pressed the play-by-play button 
on the top, and he was immediately watching in slow 
motion, while glittering purple lettering flashed across 
the lenses and the noise of the crowd pounded 
against his eardrums. 

Hawkshead Attacking Formation, he read as he 
watched the three Irish Chasers zoom closely 
together, Troy in the center, slightly ahead of Mullet 
and Moran, bearing down upon the Bulgarians. 
Porskoff Ploy flashed up next, as Troy made as though 
to dart upward with the Quaffle, drawing away the 
Bulgarian Chaser Ivanova and dropping the Quaffle to 
Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moran. One of the Bulgarian Beaters, Volkov, swung 
hard at a passing Bludger with his small club, 
knocking it into Moran’s path; Moran ducked to avoid 
the Bludger and dropped the Quaffle; and Levski, 
soaring beneath, caught it — 

“TROY SCORES!” roared Bagman, and the stadium 
shuddered with a roar of applause and cheers. “Ten 
zero to Ireland!” 

“What?” Harry yelled, looking wildly around through 
his Omnioculars. “But Levski’s got the Quaffle!” 

“Harry, if you’re not going to watch at normal speed, 
you’re going to miss things!” shouted Hermione, who 
was dancing up and down, waving her arms in the air 
while Troy did a lap of honor around the field. Harry 
looked quickly over the top of his Omni-oculars and 
saw that the leprechauns watching from the sidelines 
had all risen into the air again and formed the great, 
glittering shamrock. Across the field, the veela were 
watching them sulkily. 

Furious with himself, Harry spun his speed dial back 
to normal as play resumed. 

Harry knew enough about Quidditch to see that the 
Irish Chasers were superb. They worked as a 
seamless team, their movements so well coordinated 
that they appeared to be reading one another’s minds 
as they positioned themselves, and the rosette on 
Harry’s chest kept squeaking their names: “Troy — 
Mullet — Moran).” And within ten minutes, Ireland had 
scored twice more, bringing their lead to thirty-zero 
and causing a thunderous tide of roars and applause 
from the green-clad supporters. 

The match became still faster, but more brutal. 

Volkov and Vulchanov, the Bulgarian Beaters, were 

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




whacking the Bludgers as fiercely as possible at the 
Irish Chasers, and were starting to prevent them from 
using some of their best moves; twice they were forced 
to scatter, and then, finally, Ivanova managed to 
break through their ranks; dodge the Keeper, Ryan; 
and score Bulgaria’s first goal. 

“Fingers in your ears!” bellowed Mr. Weasley as the 
veela started to dance in celebration. Harry screwed 
up his eyes too; he wanted to keep his mind on the 
game. After a few seconds, he chanced a glance at the 
field. The veela had stopped dancing, and Bulgaria 
was again in possession of the Quaffle. 

“Dimitrov! Levski! Dimitrov! Ivanova — oh I say!” 
roared Bagman. 

One hundred thousand wizards gasped as the two 
Seekers, Krum and Lynch, plummeted through the 
center of the Chasers, so fast that it looked as though 
they had just jumped from airplanes without 
parachutes. Harry followed their descent through his 
Omnioculars, squinting to see where the Snitch was 



“They’re going to crash!” screamed Hermione next to 
Harry. 

She was half right — at the very last second, Viktor 
Krum pulled out of the dive and spiraled off. Lynch, 
however, hit the ground with a dull thud that could 
be heard throughout the stadium. A huge groan rose 
from the Irish seats. 

“Fool!” moaned Mr. Weasley. “Krum was feinting!” 

“It’s time-out!” yelled Bagman’s voice, “as trained 
mediwizards hurry onto the field to examine Aidan 
Lynch!” 

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“He’ll be okay, he only got ploughed!” Charlie said 
reassuringly to Ginny, who was hanging over the side 
of the box, looking horror-struck. “Which is what 
Krum was after, of course. ...” 

Harry hastily pressed the replay and play-by-play 
buttons on his Omnioculars, twiddled the speed dial, 
and put them back up to his eyes. 

He watched as Krum and Lynch dived again in slow 
motion. Wronski Defensive Feint — dangerous Seeker 
diversion read the shining purple lettering across his 
lenses. He saw Krum’s face contorted with 
concentration as he pulled out of the dive just in 
time, while Lynch was flattened, and he understood 
— Krum hadn’t seen the Snitch at all, he was just 
making Lynch copy him. Harry had never seen 
anyone fly like that; Krum hardly looked as though he 
was using a broomstick at all; he moved so easily 
through the air that he looked unsupported and 
weightless. Harry turned his Omnioculars back to 
normal and focused them on Krum. He was now 
circling high above Lynch, who was being revived by 
mediwizards with cups of potion. Harry, focusing still 
more closely upon Krum’s face, saw his dark eyes 
darting all over the ground a hundred feet below. He 
was using the time while Lynch was revived to look 
for the Snitch without interference. 

Lynch got to his feet at last, to loud cheers from the 
green-clad supporters, mounted his Firebolt, and 
kicked back off into the air. His revival seemed to give 
Ireland new heart. When Mostafa blew his whistle 
again, the Chasers moved into action with a skill 
unrivaled by anything Harry had seen so far. 

After fifteen more fast and furious minutes, Ireland 
had pulled ahead by ten more goals. They were now 



Page | 120 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




leading by one hundred and thirty points to ten, and 
the game was starting to get dirtier. 

As Mullet shot toward the goal posts yet again, 
clutching the Quaffle tightly under her arm, the 
Bulgarian Keeper, Zograf, flew out to meet her. 
Whatever happened was over so quickly Harry didn’t 
catch it, but a scream of rage from the Irish crowd, 
and Mostafa’s long, shrill whistle blast, told him it 
had been a foul. 

“And Mostafa takes the Bulgarian Keeper to task for 
cobbing — excessive use of elbows!” Bagman informed 
the roaring spectators. “And — yes, it’s a penalty to 
Ireland!” 

The leprechauns, who had risen angrily into the air 
like a swarm of glittering hornets when Mullet had 
been fouled, now darted together to form the words 
“HA, HA, HA!” The veela on the other side of the field 
leapt to their feet, tossed their hair angrily, and 
started to dance again. 

As one, the Weasley boys and Harry stuffed their 
fingers into their ears, but Hermione, who hadn’t 
bothered, was soon tugging on Harry’s arm. He 
turned to look at her, and she pulled his fingers 
impatiently out of his ears. 

“Look at the referee!” she said, giggling. 

Harry looked down at the field. Hassan Mostafa had 
landed right in front of the dancing veela, and was 
acting very oddly indeed. He was flexing his muscles 
and smoothing his mustache excitedly. 

“Now, we can’t have that!” said Ludo Bagman, though 
he sounded highly amused. “Somebody slap the 
referee!” 

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A mediwizard came tearing across the field, his 
fingers stuffed into his own ears, and kicked Mostafa 
hard in the shins. Mostafa seemed to come to himself; 
Harry, watching through the Omnioculars again, saw 
that he looked exceptionally embarrassed and had 
started shouting at the veela, who had stopped 
dancing and were looking mutinous. 

“And unless I’m much mistaken, Mostafa is actually 
attempting to send off the Bulgarian team mascots!” 
said Bagman’s voice. “Now there’s something we 
haven’t seen before. ... Oh this could turn nasty. ...” 

It did: The Bulgarian Beaters, Volkov and Vulchanov, 
landed on either side of Mostafa and began arguing 
furiously with him, gesticulating toward the 
leprechauns, who had now gleefully formed the words 
“HEE, HEE, HEE.” Mostafa was not impressed by the 
Bulgarians’ arguments, however; he was jabbing his 
finger into the air, clearly telling them to get flying 
again, and when they refused, he gave two short 
blasts on his whistle. 

“Two penalties for Ireland!” shouted Bagman, and the 
Bulgarian crowd howled with anger. “And Volkov and 
Vulchanov had better get back on those brooms . . . 
yes ... there they go ... and Troy takes the Quaffle ...” 

Play now reached a level of ferocity beyond anything 
they had yet seen. The Beaters on both sides were 
acting without mercy: Volkov and Vulchanov in 
particular seemed not to care whether their clubs 
made contact with Bludger or human as they swung 
them violently through the air. Dimitrov shot straight 
at Moran, who had the Quaffle, nearly knocking her 
off her broom. 

“Foul\” roared the Irish supporters as one, all 
standing up in a great wave of green. 

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Foul!” echoed Ludo Bagman’s magically magnified 
voice. “Dimitrov skins Moran — deliberately flying to 
collide there — and it’s got to be another penalty — 
yes, there’s the whistle!” 

The leprechauns had risen into the air again, and this 
time, they formed a giant hand, which was making a 
very rude sign indeed at the veela across the field. At 
this, the veela lost control. Instead of dancing, they 
launched themselves across the field and began 
throwing what seemed to be handfuls of fire at the 
leprechauns. Watching through his Omnioculars, 
Harry saw that they didn’t look remotely beautiful 
now. On the contrary, their faces were elongating into 
sharp, cruel-beaked bird heads, and long, scaly wings 
were bursting from their shoulders — 

“And that, boys,” yelled Mr. Weasley over the tumult 
of the crowd below, “is why you should never go for 
looks alone!” 

Ministry wizards were flooding onto the field to 
separate the veela and the leprechauns, but with little 
success; meanwhile, the pitched battle below was 
nothing to the one taking place above. Harry turned 
this way and that, staring through his Omnioculars, 
as the Quaffle changed hands with the speed of a 
bullet. 

“Levski — Dimitrov — Moran — Troy — Mullet — 
Ivanova — Moran again — Moran — MORAN 
SCORES!” 

But the cheers of the Irish supporters were barely 
heard over the shrieks of the veela, the blasts now 
issuing from the Ministry members’ wands, and the 
furious roars of the Bulgarians. The game 
recommenced immediately; now Levski had the 
Quaffle, now Dimitrov — 

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The Irish Beater Quigley swung heavily at a passing 
Bludger, and hit it as hard as possible toward Krum, 
who did not duck quickly enough. It hit him full in 
the face. 

There was a deafening groan from the crowd; Krum’s 
nose looked broken, there was blood everywhere, but 
Hassan Mostafa didn’t blow his whistle. He had 
become distracted, and Harry couldn’t blame him; 
one of the veela had thrown a handful of fire and set 
his broom tail alight. 

Harry wanted someone to realize that Krum was 
injured; even though he was supporting Ireland, 

Krum was the most exciting player on the field. Ron 
obviously felt the same. 

“Time-out! Ah, come on, he can’t play like that, look 
at him — ” 

“Look at Lynch 1” Harry yelled. 

For the Irish Seeker had suddenly gone into a dive, 
and Harry was quite sure that this was no Wronski 
Feint; this was the real thing. ... 

“He’s seen the Snitch!” Harry shouted. “He’s seen it! 
Look at him go!” 

Half the crowd seemed to have realized what was 
happening; the Irish supporters rose in another great 
wave of green, screaming their Seeker on . . . but Krum 
was on his tail. How he could see where he was going, 
Harry had no idea; there were flecks of blood flying 
through the air behind him, but he was drawing level 
with Lynch now as the pair of them hurtled toward 
the ground again — 

“They’re going to crash!” shrieked Hermione. 

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They’re not!” roared Ron. 

“Lynch is!” yelled Harry. 

And he was right — for the second time, Lynch hit the 
ground with tremendous force and was immediately 
stampeded by a horde of angry veela. 

“The Snitch, where’s the Snitch?” bellowed Charlie, 
along the row. 

“He’s got it — Krum’s got it — it’s all over!” shouted 
Harry. 

Krum, his red robes shining with blood from his nose, 
was rising gently into the air, his fist held high, a glint 
of gold in his hand. 

The scoreboard was flashing BULGARIA: 160, 
IRELAND: 170 across the crowd, who didn’t seem to 
have realized what had happened. Then, slowly, as 
though a great jumbo jet were revving up, the 
rumbling from the Ireland supporters grew louder and 
louder and erupted into screams of delight. 

“IRELAND WINS!” Bagman shouted, who like the 
Irish, seemed to be taken aback by the sudden end of 
the match. “KRUM GETS THE SNITCH — BUT 
IRELAND WINS — good lord, I don’t think any of us 
were expecting that!” 

“What did he catch the Snitch for?” Ron bellowed, 
even as he jumped up and down, applauding with his 
hands over his head. “He ended it when Ireland were 
a hundred and sixty points ahead, the idiot!” 

“He knew they were never going to catch up!” Harry 
shouted back over all the noise, also applauding 



Page | 125 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




loudly. “The Irish Chasers were too good. ... He 
wanted to end it on his terms, that’s all. ...” 



“He was very brave, wasn’t he?” Hermione said, 
leaning forward to watch Krum land as a swarm of 
mediwizards blasted a path through the battling 
leprechauns and veela to get to him. “He looks a 
terrible mess. ...” 

Harry put his Omnioculars to his eyes again. It was 
hard to see what was happening below, because 
leprechauns were zooming delightedly all over the 
field, but he could just make out Krum, surrounded 
by mediwizards. He looked surlier than ever and 
refused to let them mop him up. His team members 
were around him, shaking their heads and looking 
dejected; a short way away, the Irish players were 
dancing gleefully in a shower of gold descending from 
their mascots. Flags were waving all over the stadium, 
the Irish national anthem blared from all sides; the 
veela were shrinking back into their usual, beautiful 
selves now, though looking dispirited and forlorn. 

“Veil, ve fought bravely,” said a gloomy voice behind 
Harry. He looked around; it was the Bulgarian 
Minister of Magic. 

“You can speak English!” said Fudge, sounding 
outraged. “And you’ve been letting me mime 
everything all day!” 

“Veil, it vos very funny,” said the Bulgarian minister, 
shrugging. 

“And as the Irish team performs a lap of honor, 
flanked by their mascots, the Quidditch World Cup 
itself is brought into the Top Box!” roared Bagman. 



Page | 126 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s eyes were suddenly dazzled by a blinding 
white light, as the Top Box was magically illuminated 
so that everyone in the stands could see the inside. 
Squinting toward the entrance, he saw two panting 
wizards carrying a vast golden cup into the box, 
which they handed to Cornelius Fudge, who was still 
looking very disgruntled that he’d been using sign 
language all day for nothing. 

“Let’s have a really loud hand for the gallant losers — 
Bulgaria!” Bagman shouted. 

And up the stairs into the box came the seven 
defeated Bulgarian players. The crowd below was 
applauding appreciatively; Harry could see thousands 
and thousands of Omniocular lenses flashing and 
winking in their direction. 

One by one, the Bulgarians filed between the rows of 
seats in the box, and Bagman called out the name of 
each as they shook hands with their own minister 
and then with Fudge. Krum, who was last in line, 
looked a real mess. Two black eyes were blooming 
spectacularly on his bloody face. He was still holding 
the Snitch. Harry noticed that he seemed much less 
coordinated on the ground. He was slightly duck- 
footed and distinctly round-shouldered. But when 
Krum’s name was announced, the whole stadium 
gave him a resounding, earsplitting roar. 

And then came the Irish team. Aidan Lynch was being 
supported by Moran and Connolly; the second crash 
seemed to have dazed him and his eyes looked 
strangely unfocused. But he grinned happily as Troy 
and Quigley lifted the Cup into the air and the crowd 
below thundered its approval. Harry’s hands were 
numb with clapping. 



Page | 127 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




At last, when the Irish team had left the box to 
perform another lap of honor on their brooms (Aidan 
Lynch on the back of Connolly’s, clutching hard 
around his waist and still grinning in a bemused sort 
of way), Bagman pointed his wand at his throat and 
muttered, “Quietus.” 

“They’ll be talking about this one for years,” he said 
hoarsely, “a really unexpected twist, that. ... shame it 
couldn’t have lasted longer. ... Ah yes. ... yes, I owe 
you . . . how much?” 

For Fred and George had just scrambled over the 
backs of their seats and were standing in front of 
Ludo Bagman with broad grins on their faces, their 
hands outstretched. 



Page | 128 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




9 




THE DARK MARK 

“ Don’t tell your mother you’ve been gambling,” Mr. 
Weasley implored Fred and George as they all made 
their way slowly down the purple-carpeted stairs. 

“Don’t worry, Dad,” said Fred gleefully, “we’ve got big 
plans for this money. We don’t want it confiscated.” 

Mr. Weasley looked for a moment as though he was 
going to ask what these big plans were, but seemed to 
decide, upon reflection, that he didn’t want to know. 

They were soon caught up in the crowds now flooding 
out of the stadium and back to their campsites. 
Raucous singing was borne toward them on the night 
air as they retraced their steps along the lantern-lit 
path, and leprechauns kept shooting over their heads, 
cackling and waving their lanterns. When they finally 
reached the tents, nobody felt like sleeping at all, and 
given the level of noise around them, Mr. Weasley 
agreed that they could all have one last cup of cocoa 
together before turning in. They were soon arguing 
enjoyably about the match; Mr. Weasley got drawn 

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



into a disagreement about cobbing with Charlie, and 
it was only when Ginny fell asleep right at the tiny 
table and spilled hot chocolate all over the floor that 
Mr. Weasley called a halt to the verbal replays and 
insisted that everyone go to bed. Hermione and Ginny 
went into the next tent, and Harry and the rest of the 
Weasleys changed into pajamas and clambered into 
their bunks. From the other side of the campsite they 
could still hear much singing and the odd echoing 
bang. 

“Oh I am glad I’m not on duty,” muttered Mr. Weasley 
sleepily. “I wouldn’t fancy having to go and tell the 
Irish they’ve got to stop celebrating.” 

Harry, who was on a top bunk above Ron, lay staring 
up at the canvas ceiling of the tent, watching the glow 
of an occasional leprechaun lantern flying overhead, 
and picturing again some of Krum’s more spectacular 
moves. He was itching to get back on his own Firebolt 
and try out the Wronski Feint. ... Somehow Oliver 
Wood had never managed to convey with all his 
wriggling diagrams what that move was supposed to 
look like. ... Harry saw himself in robes that had his 
name on the back, and imagined the sensation of 
hearing a hundred-thousand-strong crowd roar, as 
Ludo Bagman’s voice echoed throughout the stadium, 
“I give you ... PotteA.” 

Harry never knew whether or not he had actually 
dropped off to sleep — his fantasies of flying like 
Krum might well have slipped into actual dreams — 
all he knew was that, quite suddenly, Mr. Weasley 
was shouting. 

“Get up! Ron — Harry — come on now, get up, this is 
urgent!” 



Page | 130 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry sat up quickly and the top of his head hit 
canvas. 

“ ’S’ matter?” he said. 

Dimly, he could tell that something was wrong. The 
noises in the campsite had changed. The singing had 
stopped. He could hear screams, and the sound of 
people running. He slipped down from the bunk and 
reached for his clothes, but Mr. Weasley, who had 
pulled on his jeans over his own pajamas, said, “No 
time, Harry — just grab a jacket and get outside — 
quickly!” 

Harry did as he was told and hurried out of the tent, 
Ron at his heels. 

By the light of the few fires that were still burning, he 
could see people running away into the woods, fleeing 
something that was moving across the field toward 
them, something that was emitting odd flashes of 
light and noises like gunfire. Loud jeering, roars of 
laughter, and drunken yells were drifting toward 
them; then came a burst of strong green light, which 
illuminated the scene. 

A crowd of wizards, tightly packed and moving 
together with wands pointing straight upward, was 
marching slowly across the field. Harry squinted at 
them. ... They didn’t seem to have faces. ... Then he 
realized that their heads were hooded and their faces 
masked. High above them, floating along in midair, 
four struggling figures were being contorted into 
grotesque shapes. It was as though the masked 
wizards on the ground were puppeteers, and the 
people above them were marionettes operated by 
invisible strings that rose from the wands into the air. 
Two of the figures were very small. 



Page | 131 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




More wizards were joining the marching group, 
laughing and pointing up at the floating bodies. Tents 
crumpled and fell as the marching crowd swelled. 
Once or twice Harry saw one of the marchers blast a 
tent out of his way with his wand. Several caught fire. 
The screaming grew louder. 

The floating people were suddenly illuminated as they 
passed over a burning tent and Harry recognized one 
of them: Mr. Roberts, the campsite manager. The 
other three looked as though they might be his wife 
and children. One of the marchers below flipped Mrs. 
Roberts upside down with his wand; her nightdress 
fell down to reveal voluminous drawers and she 
struggled to cover herself up as the crowd below her 
screeched and hooted with glee. 

“That’s sick,” Ron muttered, watching the smallest 
Muggle child, who had begun to spin like a top, sixty 
feet above the ground, his head flopping limply from 
side to side. “That is really sick. ...” 

Hermione and Ginny came hurrying toward them, 
pulling coats over their nightdresses, with Mr. 

Weasley right behind them. At the same moment, Bill, 
Charlie, and Percy emerged from the boys’ tent, fully 
dressed, with their sleeves rolled up and their wands 
out. 

“We’re going to help the Ministry!” Mr. Weasley 
shouted over all the noise, rolling up his own sleeves. 
“You lot — get into the woods, and stick together. I’ll 
come and fetch you when we’ve sorted this out!” 

Bill, Charlie, and Percy were already sprinting away 
toward the oncoming marchers; Mr. Weasley tore 
after them. Ministry wizards were dashing from every 
direction toward the source of the trouble. The crowd 
beneath the Roberts family was coming ever closer. 
Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“C’mon,” said Fred, grabbing Ginny’s hand and 
starting to pull her toward the wood. Harry, Ron, 
Hermione, and George followed. They all looked back 
as they reached the trees. The crowd beneath the 
Roberts family was larger than ever; they could see 
the Ministry wizards trying to get through it to the 
hooded wizards in the center, but they were having 
great difficulty. It looked as though they were scared 
to perform any spell that might make the Roberts 
family fall. 

The colored lanterns that had lit the path to the 
stadium had been extinguished. Dark figures were 
blundering through the trees; children were crying; 
anxious shouts and panicked voices were 
reverberating around them in the cold night air. 

Harry felt himself being pushed hither and thither by 
people whose faces he could not see. Then he heard 
Ron yell with pain. 

“What happened?” said Hermione anxiously, stopping 
so abruptly that Harry walked into her. “Ron, where 
are you? Oh this is stupid — lumos\” 

She illuminated her wand and directed its narrow 
beam across the path. Ron was lying sprawled on the 
ground. 

“Tripped over a tree root,” he said angrily, getting to 
his feet again. 

“Well, with feet that size, hard not to,” said a drawling 
voice from behind them. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned sharply. Draco 
Malfoy was standing alone nearby, leaning against a 
tree, looking utterly relaxed. His arms folded, he 
seemed to have been watching the scene at the 
campsite through a gap in the trees. 

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron told Malfoy to do something that Harry knew he 
would never have dared say in front of Mrs. Weasley 

“Language, Weasley,” said Malfoy, his pale eyes 
glittering. “Hadn’t you better be hurrying along, now? 
You wouldn’t like her spotted, would you?” 

He nodded at Hermione, and at the same moment, a 
blast like a bomb sounded from the campsite, and a 
flash of green light momentarily lit the trees around 
them. 

“What’s that supposed to mean?” said Hermione 
defiantly. 

“Granger, they’re after Muggles,” said Malfoy. “D’you 
want to be showing off your knickers in midair? 
Because if you do, hang around ... they’re moving this 
way, and it would give us all a laugh.” 

“Hermione’s a witch,” Harry snarled. 

“Have it your own way, Potter,” said Malfoy, grinning 
maliciously. “If you think they can’t spot a Mudblood, 
stay where you are.” 

“You watch your mouth!” shouted Ron. Everybody 
present knew that “Mudblood” was a very offensive 
term for a witch or wizard of Muggle parentage. 

“Never mind, Ron,” said Hermione quickly, seizing 
Ron’s arm to restrain him as he took a step toward 
Malfoy. 

There came a bang from the other side of the trees 
that was louder than anything they had heard. 

Several people nearby screamed. Malfoy chuckled 
softly. 



Page | 134 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Scare easily, don’t they?” he said lazily. “I suppose 
your daddy told you all to hide? What’s he up to — 
trying to rescue the Muggles?” 

“Where’re your parents?” said Harry, his temper 
rising. “Out there wearing masks, are they?” 

Malfoy turned his face to Harry, still smiling. 

“Well ... if they were, I wouldn’t be likely to tell you, 
would I, Potter?” 

“Oh come on,” said Hermione, with a disgusted look 
at Malfoy, “let’s go and find the others.” 

“Keep that big bushy head down, Granger,” sneered 
Malfoy. 

“Come on,” Hermione repeated, and she pulled Harry 
and Ron up the path again. 

“I’ll bet you anything his dad is one of that masked 
lot!” said Ron hotly. 

“Well, with any luck, the Ministry will catch him!” 
said Hermione fervently. “Oh I can’t believe this. 

Where have the others got to?” 

Fred, George, and Ginny were nowhere to be seen, 
though the path was packed with plenty of other 
people, all looking nervously over their shoulders 
toward the commotion back at the campsite. A huddle 
of teenagers in pajamas was arguing vociferously a 
little way along the path. When they saw Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione, a girl with thick curly hair turned and 
said quickly, “ Ou est Madame Maxime? Nous Vavons 
perdue — ” 

“Er — what?” said Ron. 

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh ...” The girl who had spoken turned her back on 
him, and as they walked on they distinctly heard her 
say, “ ’Ogwarts.” 

“Beauxbatons,” muttered Hermione. 

“Sorry?” said Harry. 

“They must go to Beauxbatons,” said Hermione. “You 
know . . . Beauxbatons Academy of Magic ... I read 
about it in An Appraisal of Magical Education in 
Europe.” 

“Oh ... yeah ... right,” said Harry. 

“Fred and George can’t have gone that far,” said Ron, 
pulling out his wand, lighting it like Hermione’s, and 
squinting up the path. Harry dug in the pockets of his 
jacket for his own wand — but it wasn’t there. The 
only thing he could find was his Omnioculars. 

“Ah, no, I don’t believe it ... I’ve lost my wand!” 

“You’re kidding!” 

Ron and Hermione raised their wands high enough to 
spread the narrow beams of light farther on the 
ground; Harry looked all around him, but his wand 
was nowhere to be seen. 

“Maybe it’s back in the tent,” said Ron. 

“Maybe it fell out of your pocket when we were 
running?” Hermione suggested anxiously. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, “maybe ...” 

He usually kept his wand with him at all times in the 
wizarding world, and finding himself without it in the 

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




midst of a scene like this made him feel very 
vulnerable. 



A rustling noise nearby made all three of them jump. 
Winky the house-elf was fighting her way out of a 
clump of bushes nearby. She was moving in a most 
peculiar fashion, apparently with great difficulty; it 
was as though someone invisible were trying to hold 
her back. 

“There is bad wizards about!” she squeaked 
distractedly as she leaned forward and labored to 
keep running. “People high — high in the air! Winky 
is getting out of the way!” 

And she disappeared into the trees on the other side 
of the path, panting and squeaking as she fought the 
force that was restraining her. 

“What’s up with her?” said Ron, looking curiously 
after Winky. “Why can’t she run properly?” 

“Bet she didn’t ask permission to hide,” said Harry. 

He was thinking of Dobby: Every time he had tried to 
do something the Malfoys wouldn’t like, the house-elf 
had been forced to start beating himself up. 

“You know, house-elves get a very raw deal!” said 
Hermione indignantly. “It’s slavery, that’s what it is! 
That Mr. Crouch made her go up to the top of the 
stadium, and she was terrified, and he’s got her 
bewitched so she can’t even run when they start 
trampling tents! Why doesn’t anyone do something 
about it?” 

“Well, the elves are happy, aren’t they?” Ron said. 

“You heard old Winky back at the match ... ‘House- 
elves is not supposed to have fun’ ... that’s what she 
likes, being bossed around. ...” 

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s people like you, Ron,” Hermione began hotly, 

“who prop up rotten and unjust systems, just 
because they’re too lazy to — ” 

Another loud bang echoed from the edge of the wood. 

“Let’s just keep moving, shall we?” said Ron, and 
Harry saw him glance edgily at Hermione. Perhaps 
there was truth in what Malfoy had said; perhaps 
Hermione was in more danger than they were. They 
set off again, Harry still searching his pockets, even 
though he knew his wand wasn’t there. 

They followed the dark path deeper into the wood, 
still keeping an eye out for Fred, George, and Ginny. 
They passed a group of goblins who were cackling 
over a sack of gold that they had undoubtedly won 
betting on the match, and who seemed quite 
unperturbed by the trouble at the campsite. Farther 
still along the path, they walked into a patch of silvery 
light, and when they looked through the trees, they 
saw three tall and beautiful veela standing in a 
clearing, surrounded by a gaggle of young wizards, all 
of whom were talking very loudly. 

“I pull down about a hundred sacks of Galleons a 
year!” one of them shouted. “I’m a dragon killer for 
the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous 
Creatures.” 

“No, you’re not!” yelled his friend. “You’re a 
dishwasher at the Leaky Cauldron. ... but I’m a 
vampire hunter, I’ve killed about ninety so far — ” 

A third young wizard, whose pimples were visible even 
by the dim, silvery light of the veela, now cut in, “I’m 
about to become the youngest ever Minister of Magic, 

I am.” 



Page | 138 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry snorted with laughter. He recognized the 
pimply wizard: His name was Stan Shunpike, and he 
was in fact a conductor on the triple-decker Knight 
Bus. He turned to tell Ron this, but Ron’s face had 
gone oddly slack, and next second Ron was yelling, 
“Did I tell you I’ve invented a broomstick that’ll reach 
Jupiter?” 

“Honestly\” said Hermione, and she and Harry 
grabbed Ron firmly by the arms, wheeled him around, 
and marched him away. By the time the sounds of 
the veela and their admirers had faded completely, 
they were in the very heart of the wood. They seemed 
to be alone now; everything was much quieter. 

Harry looked around. “I reckon we can just wait here, 
you know. Well hear anyone coming a mile off.” 

The words were hardly out of his mouth, when Ludo 
Bagman emerged from behind a tree right ahead of 
them. 

Even by the feeble light of the two wands, Harry could 
see that a great change had come over Bagman. He 
no longer looked buoyant and rosy-faced; there was 
no more spring in his step. He looked very white and 
strained. 

“Who’s that?” he said, blinking down at them, trying 
to make out their faces. “What are you doing in here, 
all alone?” 

They looked at one another, surprised. 

“Well — there’s a sort of riot going on,” said Ron. 
Bagman stared at him. 

“What?” 

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“At the campsite . . . some people have got hold of a 
family of Muggles. ...” 

Bagman swore loudly. 

“Damn them!” he said, looking quite distracted, and 
without another word, he Disapparated with a small 
pop\ 

“Not exactly on top of things, Mr. Bagman, is he?” 
said Hermione, frowning. 

“He was a great Beater, though,” said Ron, leading 
the way off the path into a small clearing, and sitting 
down on a patch of dry grass at the foot of a tree. 

“The Wimbourne Wasps won the league three times in 
a row while he was with them.” 

He took his small figure of Krum out of his pocket, set 
it down on the ground, and watched it walk around. 
Like the real Krum, the model was slightly duck- 
footed and round-shouldered, much less impressive 
on his splayed feet than on his broomstick. Harry was 
listening for noise from the campsite. Everything 
seemed much quieter; perhaps the riot was over. 

“I hope the others are okay,” said Hermione after a 
while. 

“They’ll be fine,” said Ron. 

“Imagine if your dad catches Lucius Malfoy,” said 
Harry, sitting down next to Ron and watching the 
small figure of Krum slouching over the fallen leaves. 
“He’s always said he’d like to get something on him.” 

“That’d wipe the smirk off old Draco’s face, all right,” 
said Ron. 



Page | 140 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Those poor Muggles, though,” said Hermione 
nervously. “What if they can’t get them down?” 

“They will,” said Ron reassuringly. “They’ll find a 
way.” 

“Mad, though, to do something like that when the 
whole Ministry of Magic’s out here tonight!” said 
Hermione. “I mean, how do they expect to get away 
with it? Do you think they’ve been drinking, or are 
they just — ” 

But she broke off abruptly and looked over her 
shoulder. Harry and Ron looked quickly around too. 

It sounded as though someone was staggering toward 
their clearing. They waited, listening to the sounds of 
the uneven steps behind the dark trees. But the 
footsteps came to a sudden halt. 

“Hello?” called Harry. 

There was silence. Harry got to his feet and peered 
around the tree. It was too dark to see very far, but he 
could sense somebody standing just beyond the range 
of his vision. 

“Who’s there?” he said. 

And then, without warning, the silence was rent by a 
voice unlike any they had heard in the wood; and it 
uttered, not a panicked shout, but what sounded like 
a spell. 

“MORSMORDREl ” 

And something vast, green, and glittering erupted 
from the patch of darkness Harry’s eyes had been 
struggling to penetrate; it flew up over the treetops 
and into the sky. 

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What the — ?” gasped Ron as he sprang to his feet 
again, staring up at the thing that had appeared. 

For a split second, Harry thought it was another 
leprechaun formation. Then he realized that it was a 
colossal skull, comprised of what looked like emerald 
stars, with a serpent protruding from its mouth like a 
tongue. As they watched, it rose higher and higher, 
blazing in a haze of greenish smoke, etched against 
the black sky like a new constellation. 

Suddenly, the wood all around them erupted with 
screams. Harry didn’t understand why, but the only 
possible cause was the sudden appearance of the 
skull, which had now risen high enough to illuminate 
the entire wood like some grisly neon sign. He 
scanned the darkness for the person who had 
conjured the skull, but he couldn’t see anyone. 

“Who’s there?” he called again. 

“Harry, come on, move\” Hermione had seized the 
collar of his jacket and was tugging him backward. 

“What’s the matter?” Harry said, startled to see her 
face so white and terrified. 

“It’s the Dark Mark, Harry!” Hermione moaned, 
pulling him as hard as she could. “You-Know-Who’s 
sign!” 

“Voldemort’s — ?” 

“Harry, come on!” 

Harry turned — Ron was hurriedly scooping up his 
miniature Krum — the three of them started across 
the clearing — but before they had taken a few 
hurried steps, a series of popping noises announced 

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the arrival of twenty wizards, appearing from thin air, 
surrounding them. 

Harry whirled around, and in an instant, he 
registered one fact: Each of these wizards had his 
wand out, and every wand was pointing right at 
himself, Ron, and Hermione. 

Without pausing to think, he yelled, “DUCK!” 

He seized the other two and pulled them down onto 
the ground. 

“STUPEFYl” roared twenty voices — there was a 
blinding series of flashes and Harry felt the hair on 
his head ripple as though a powerful wind had swept 
the clearing. Raising his head a fraction of an inch he 
saw jets of fiery red light flying over them from the 
wizards’ wands, crossing one another, bouncing off 
tree trunks, rebounding into the darkness — 

“Stop!” yelled a voice he recognized. “STOP! That’s my 
son\” 

Harry’s hair stopped blowing about. He raised his 
head a little higher. The wizard in front of him had 
lowered his wand. He rolled over and saw Mr. Weasley 
striding toward them, looking terrified. 

“Ron — Harry” — his voice sounded shaky — 
“Hermione — are you all right?” 

“Out of the way, Arthur,” said a cold, curt voice. 

It was Mr. Crouch. He and the other Ministry wizards 
were closing in on them. Harry got to his feet to face 
them. Mr. Crouch’s face was taut with rage. 



Page | 143 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Which of you did it?” he snapped, his sharp eyes 
darting between them. “Which of you conjured the 
Dark Mark?” 

“We didn’t do that!” said Harry, gesturing up at the 
skull. 

“We didn’t do anything!” said Ron, who was rubbing 
his elbow and looking indignantly at his father. “What 
did you want to attack us for?” 

“Do not lie, sir!” shouted Mr. Crouch. His wand was 
still pointing directly at Ron, and his eyes were 
popping — he looked slightly mad. “You have been 
discovered at the scene of the crime!” 

“Barty,” whispered a witch in a long woolen dressing 
gown, “they’re kids, Barty, they’d never have been 
able to — ” 

“Where did the Mark come from, you three?” said Mr. 
Weasley quickly. 

“Over there,” said Hermione shakily, pointing at the 
place where they had heard the voice. “There was 
someone behind the trees . . . they shouted words — 
an incantation — ” 

“Oh, stood over there, did they?” said Mr. Crouch, 
turning his popping eyes on Hermione now, disbelief 
etched all over his face. “Said an incantation, did 
they? You seem very well informed about how that 
Mark is summoned, missy — ” 

But none of the Ministry wizards apart from Mr. 
Crouch seemed to think it remotely likely that Harry, 
Ron, or Hermione had conjured the skull; on the 
contrary, at Hermione’s words, they had all raised 



Page | 144 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




their wands again and were pointing in the direction 
she had indicated, squinting through the dark trees. 

“We’re too late,” said the witch in the woolen dressing 
gown, shaking her head. “They’ll have Disapparated.” 

“I don’t think so,” said a wizard with a scrubby brown 
beard. It was Amos Diggory, Cedric’s father. “Our 
Stunners went right through those trees. ... There’s a 
good chance we got them. ...” 

“Amos, be careful!” said a few of the wizards 
warningly as Mr. Diggory squared his shoulders, 
raised his wand, marched across the clearing, and 
disappeared into the darkness. Hermione watched 
him vanish with her hands over her mouth. 

A few seconds later, they heard Mr. Diggory shout. 

“Yes! We got them! There’s someone here! 
Unconscious! It’s — but — blimey ...” 

“You’ve got someone?” shouted Mr. Crouch, sounding 
highly disbelieving. “Who? Who is it?” 

They heard snapping twigs, the rustling of leaves, and 
then crunching footsteps as Mr. Diggory reemerged 
from behind the trees. He was carrying a tiny, limp 
figure in his arms. Harry recognized the tea towel at 
once. It was Winky. 

Mr. Crouch did not move or speak as Mr. Diggory 
deposited his elf on the ground at his feet. The other 
Ministry wizards were all staring at Mr. Crouch. For a 
few seconds Crouch remained transfixed, his eyes 
blazing in his white face as he stared down at Winky. 
Then he appeared to come to life again. 

“This — cannot — be,” he said jerkily. “No — ” 

Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He moved quickly around Mr. Diggory and strode off 
toward the place where he had found Winky. 



“No point, Mr. Crouch,” Mr. Diggory called after him. 
“There’s no one else there.” 

But Mr. Crouch did not seem prepared to take his 
word for it. They could hear him moving around and 
the rustling of leaves as he pushed the bushes aside, 
searching. 

“Bit embarrassing,” Mr. Diggory said grimly, looking 
down at Winky’s unconscious form. “Barty Crouch’s 
house-elf ... I mean to say ...” 

“Come off it, Amos,” said Mr. Weasley quietly, “you 
don’t seriously think it was the elf? The Dark Mark’s a 
wizard’s sign. It requires a wand.” 

“Yeah,” said Mr. Diggory, “and she had a wand.” 

“What?” said Mr. Weasley. 

“Here, look.” Mr. Diggory held up a wand and showed 
it to Mr. Weasley. “Had it in her hand. So that’s 
clause three of the Code of Wand Use broken, for a 
start. No non-human creature is permitted to carry or 
use a wand.” 

Just then there was another pop, and Ludo Bagman 
Apparated right next to Mr. Weasley. Looking 
breathless and disorientated, he spun on the spot, 
goggling upward at the emerald-green skull. 

“The Dark Mark!” he panted, almost trampling Winky 
as he turned inquiringly to his colleagues. “Who did 
it? Did you get them? Barty! What’s going on?” 



Page | 146 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Crouch had returned empty-handed. His face was 
still ghostly white, and his hands and his toothbrush 
mustache were both twitching. 

“Where have you been, Barty?” said Bagman. “Why 
weren’t you at the match? Your elf was saving you a 
seat too — gulping gargoyles!” Bagman had just 
noticed Winky lying at his feet. “What happened to 
her?” 

“I have been busy, Ludo,” said Mr. Crouch, still 
talking in the same jerky fashion, barely moving his 
lips. “And my elf has been stunned.” 

“Stunned? By you lot, you mean? But why — ?” 

Comprehension dawned suddenly on Bagman’s 
round, shiny face; he looked up at the skull, down at 
Winky, and then at Mr. Crouch. 

“iVo!” he said. “Winky? Conjure the Dark Mark? She 
wouldn’t know how! She’d need a wand, for a start!” 

“And she had one,” said Mr. Diggory. “I found her 
holding one, Ludo. If it’s all right with you, Mr. 

Crouch, I think we should hear what she’s got to say 
for herself.” 

Crouch gave no sign that he had heard Mr. Diggory, 
but Mr. Diggory seemed to take his silence for assent. 
He raised his own wand, pointed it at Winky, and 
said, “Rennervatel” 

Winky stirred feebly. Her great brown eyes opened 
and she blinked several times in a bemused sort of 
way. Watched by the silent wizards, she raised herself 
shakily into a sitting position. She caught sight of Mr. 
Diggory’s feet, and slowly, tremulously, raised her 
eyes to stare up into his face; then, more slowly still, 
Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




she looked up into the sky. Harry could see the 
floating skull reflected twice in her enormous, glassy 
eyes. She gave a gasp, looked wildly around the 
crowded clearing, and burst into terrified sobs. 

“Elf!” said Mr. Diggory sternly. “Do you know who I 
am? I’m a member of the Department for the 
Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures!” 

Winky began to rock backward and forward on the 
ground, her breath coming in sharp bursts. Harry 
was reminded forcibly of Dobby in his moments of 
terrified disobedience. 

“As you see, elf, the Dark Mark was conjured here a 
short while ago,” said Mr. Diggory. “And you were 
discovered moments later, right beneath it! An 
explanation, if you please!” 

“I — I — I is not doing it, sir!” Winky gasped. “I is not 
knowing how, sir!” 

“You were found with a wand in your hand!” barked 
Mr. Diggory, brandishing it in front of her. And as the 
wand caught the green light that was filling the 
clearing from the skull above, Harry recognized it. 

“Hey — that’s mine!” he said. 

Everyone in the clearing looked at him. 

“Excuse me?” said Mr. Diggory, incredulously. 

“That’s my wand!” said Harry. “I dropped it!” 

“You dropped it?” repeated Mr. Diggory in disbelief. 

“Is this a confession? You threw it aside after you 
conjured the Mark?” 



Page | 148 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Amos, think who you’re talking to!” said Mr. Weasley, 
very angrily. “Is Harry Potter likely to conjure the 
Dark Mark?” 

“Er — of course not,” mumbled Mr. Diggory. “Sorry ... 
carried away ...” 

“I didn’t drop it there, anyway,” said Harry, jerking 
his thumb toward the trees beneath the skull. “I 
missed it right after we got into the wood.” 

“So,” said Mr. Diggory, his eyes hardening as he 
turned to look at Winky again, cowering at his feet. 
“You found this wand, eh, elf? And you picked it up 
and thought you’d have some fun with it, did you?” 

“I is not doing magic with it, sir!” squealed Winky, 
tears streaming down the sides of her squashed and 
bulbous nose. “I is ... I is ... I is just picking it up, sir! 

I is not making the Dark Mark, sir, I is not knowing 
how!” 

“It wasn’t her!” said Hermione. She looked very 
nervous, speaking up in front of all these Ministry 
wizards, yet determined all the same. “Winky’s got a 
squeaky little voice, and the voice we heard doing the 
incantation was much deeper!” She looked around at 
Harry and Ron, appealing for their support. “It didn’t 
sound anything like Winky, did it?” 

“No,” said Harry, shaking his head. “It definitely didn’t 
sound like an elf.” 

“Yeah, it was a human voice,” said Ron. 

“Well, we’ll soon see,” growled Mr. Diggory, looking 
unimpressed. “There’s a simple way of discovering the 
last spell a wand performed, elf, did you know that?” 



Page | 149 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Winky trembled and shook her head frantically, her 
ears flapping, as Mr. Diggory raised his own wand 
again and placed it tip to tip with Harry’s. 

“ Prior Incantatol” roared Mr. Diggory. 

Harry heard Hermione gasp, horrified, as a gigantic 
serpent-tongued skull erupted from the point where 
the two wands met, but it was a mere shadow of the 
green skull high above them; it looked as though it 
were made of thick gray smoke: the ghost of a spell. 

“Deletrius\” Mr. Diggory shouted, and the smoky skull 
vanished in a wisp of smoke. 

“So,” said Mr. Diggory with a kind of savage triumph, 
looking down upon Winky, who was still shaking 
convulsively. 

“I is not doing it!” she squealed, her eyes rolling in 
terror. “I is not, I is not, I is not knowing how! I is a 
good elf, I isn’t using wands, I isn’t knowing how!” 

“ You’ve been caught red-handed, elf.” Mr. Diggory 
roared. “Caught with the guilty wand in your hand\” 

“Amos,” said Mr. Weasley loudly, “think about it ... 
precious few wizards know how to do that spell. ... 
Where would she have learned it?” 

“Perhaps Amos is suggesting,” said Mr. Crouch, cold 
anger in every syllable, “that I routinely teach my 
servants to conjure the Dark Mark?” 

There was a deeply unpleasant silence. Amos Diggory 
looked horrified. “Mr. Crouch ... not ... not at all ...” 

“You have now come very close to accusing the two 
people in this clearing who are least likely to conjure 

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




that Mark!” barked Mr. Crouch. “Harry Potter — and 
myself! I suppose you are familiar with the boy’s 
story, Amos?” 

“Of course — everyone knows — ” muttered Mr. 
Diggory, looking highly discomforted. 

“And I trust you remember the many proofs I have 
given, over a long career, that I despise and detest the 
Dark Arts and those who practice them?” Mr. Crouch 
shouted, his eyes bulging again. 

“Mr. Crouch, I — I never suggested you had anything 
to do with it!” Amos Diggory muttered again, now 
reddening behind his scrubby brown beard. 

“If you accuse my elf, you accuse me, Diggory!” 
shouted Mr. Crouch. “Where else would she have 
learned to conjure it?” 

“She — she might’ve picked it up anywhere — ” 

“Precisely, Amos,” said Mr. Weasley. “ She might have 
picked it up anywhere. ... Winky?” he said kindly, 
turning to the elf, but she flinched as though he too 
was shouting at her. “Where exactly did you find 
Harry’s wand?” 

Winky was twisting the hem of her tea towel so 
violently that it was fraying beneath her fingers. 

“I — I is finding it ... finding it there, sir. ...” she 
whispered, “there ... in the trees, sir. ...” 

“You see, Amos?” said Mr. Weasley. “Whoever 
conjured the Mark could have Disapparated right 
after they’d done it, leaving Harry’s wand behind. A 
clever thing to do, not using their own wand, which 
could have betrayed them. And Winky here had the 
Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




misfortune to come across the wand moments later 
and pick it up.” 

“But then, she’d have been only a few feet away from 
the real culprit!” said Mr. Diggory impatiently. “Elf? 
Did you see anyone?” 

Winky began to tremble worse than ever. Her giant 
eyes flickered from Mr. Diggory, to Ludo Bagman, and 
onto Mr. Crouch. Then she gulped and said, “I is 
seeing no one, sir ... no one ...” 

“Amos,” said Mr. Crouch curtly, “I am fully aware 
that, in the ordinary course of events, you would want 
to take Winky into your department for questioning. I 
ask you, however, to allow me to deal with her.” 

Mr. Diggory looked as though he didn’t think much of 
this suggestion at all, but it was clear to Harry that 
Mr. Crouch was such an important member of the 
Ministry that he did not dare refuse him. 

“You may rest assured that she will be punished,” Mr. 
Crouch added coldly. 

“M-m-master ...” Winky stammered, looking up at Mr. 
Crouch, her eyes brimming with tears. “M-m-master, 
p-p-please ...” 

Mr. Crouch stared back, his face somehow 
sharpened, each line upon it more deeply etched. 
There was no pity in his gaze. 

“Winky has behaved tonight in a manner I would not 
have believed possible,” he said slowly. “I told her to 
remain in the tent. I told her to stay there while I 
went to sort out the trouble. And I find that she 
disobeyed me. This means clothes.” 



Page | 152 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No!” shrieked Winky, prostrating herself at Mr. 
Crouch’s feet. “No, master! Not clothes, not clothes!” 

Harry knew that the only way to turn a house-elf free 
was to present it with proper garments. It was pitiful 
to see the way Winky clutched at her tea towel as she 
sobbed over Mr. Crouch’s feet. 

“But she was frightened!” Hermione burst out angrily, 
glaring at Mr. Crouch. “Your elf’s scared of heights, 
and those wizards in masks were levitating people! 

You can’t blame her for wanting to get out of their 
way!” 

Mr. Crouch took a step backward, freeing himself 
from contact with the elf, whom he was surveying as 
though she were something filthy and rotten that was 
contaminating his over-shined shoes. 

“I have no use for a house-elf who disobeys me,” he 
said coldly, looking over at Hermione. “I have no use 
for a servant who forgets what is due to her master, 
and to her master’s reputation.” 

Winky was crying so hard that her sobs echoed 
around the clearing. There was a very nasty silence, 
which was ended by Mr. Weasley, who said quietly, 
“Well, I think I’ll take my lot back to the tent, if 
nobody’s got any objections. Amos, that wand’s told 
us all it can — if Harry could have it back, please — ” 

Mr. Diggory handed Harry his wand and Harry 
pocketed it. 

“Come on, you three,” Mr. Weasley said quietly. But 
Hermione didn’t seem to want to move; her eyes were 
still upon the sobbing elf. “Hermione!” Mr. Weasley 
said, more urgently. She turned and followed Harry 
and Ron out of the clearing and off through the trees. 
Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What’s going to happen to Winky?” said Hermione, 
the moment they had left the clearing. 

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“The way they were treating her!” said Hermione 
furiously. “Mr. Diggory, calling her ‘elf’ all the time ... 
and Mr. Crouch! He knows she didn’t do it and he’s 
still going to sack her! He didn’t care how frightened 
she’d been, or how upset she was — it was like she 
wasn’t even human!” 

“Well, she’s not,” said Ron. 

Hermione rounded on him. 

“That doesn’t mean she hasn’t got feelings, Ron. It’s 
disgusting the way — ” 

“Hermione, I agree with you,” said Mr. Weasley 
quickly, beckoning her on, “but now is not the time to 
discuss elf rights. I want to get back to the tent as 
fast as we can. What happened to the others?” 

“We lost them in the dark,” said Ron. “Dad, why was 
everyone so uptight about that skull thing?” 

“I’ll explain everything back at the tent,” said Mr. 
Weasley tensely. 

But when they reached the edge of the wood, their 
progress was impeded. A large crowd of frightened- 
looking witches and wizards was congregated there, 
and when they saw Mr. Weasley coming toward them, 
many of them surged forward. 

“What’s going on in there?” 

“Who conjured it?” 

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Arthur — it’s not — Him?” 



“Of course it’s not Him,” said Mr. Weasley 
impatiently. “We don’t know who it was; it looks like 
they Disapparated. Now excuse me, please, I want to 
get to bed.” 

He led Harry, Ron, and Hermione through the crowd 
and back into the campsite. All was quiet now; there 
was no sign of the masked wizards, though several 
ruined tents were still smoking. 

Charlie’s head was poking out of the boys’ tent. 

“Dad, what’s going on?” he called through the dark. 
“Fred, George, and Ginny got back okay, but the 
others — ” 

“I’ve got them here,” said Mr. Weasley, bending down 
and entering the tent. Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
entered after him. 

Bill was sitting at the small kitchen table, holding a 
bedsheet to his arm, which was bleeding profusely. 
Charlie had a large rip in his shirt, and Percy was 
sporting a bloody nose. Fred, George, and Ginny 
looked unhurt, though shaken. 

“Did you get them, Dad?” said Bill sharply. “The 
person who conjured the Mark?” 

“No,” said Mr. Weasley. “We found Barty Crouch’s elf 
holding Harry’s wand, but we’re none the wiser about 
who actually conjured the Mark.” 

“What?” said Bill, Charlie, and Percy together. 

“Harry’s wand?” said Fred. 



Page | 155 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Mr. Crouch’s elf?” said Percy, sounding 
thunderstruck. 

With some assistance from Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione, Mr. Weasley explained what had happened 
in the woods. When they had finished their story, 
Percy swelled indignantly. 

“Well, Mr. Crouch is quite right to get rid of an elf like 
that!” he said. “Running away when he’d expressly 
told her not to ... embarrassing him in front of the 
whole Ministry . . . how would that have looked, if 
she’d been brought up in front of the Department for 
the Regulation and Control — ” 

“She didn’t do anything — she was just in the wrong 
place at the wrong time!” Hermione snapped at Percy, 
who looked very taken aback. Hermione had always 
got on fairly well with Percy — better, indeed, than 
any of the others. 

“Hermione, a wizard in Mr. Crouch’s position can’t 
afford a house-elf who’s going to run amok with a 
wand!” said Percy pompously, recovering himself. 

“She didn’t run amok!” shouted Hermione. “She just 
picked it up off the ground!” 

“Look, can someone just explain what that skull thing 
was?” said Ron impatiently. “It wasn’t hurting 
anyone. ... Why’s it such a big deal?” 

“I told you, it’s You-Know-Who’s symbol, Ron,” said 
Hermione, before anyone else could answer. “I read 
about it in The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts.” 

“And it hasn’t been seen for thirteen years,” said Mr. 
Weasley quietly. “Of course people panicked ... it was 
almost like seeing You-Know-Who back again.” 

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t get it,” said Ron, frowning. “I mean ... it’s still 
only a shape in the sky. ...” 

“Ron, You-Know-Who and his followers sent the Dark 
Mark into the air whenever they killed,” said Mr. 
Weasley. “The terror it inspired ... you have no idea, 
you’re too young. Just picture coming home and 
finding the Dark Mark hovering over your house, and 
knowing what you’re about to find inside. ...” Mr. 
Weasley winced. “Everyone’s worst fear ... the very 
worst ...” 

There was silence for a moment. Then Bill, removing 
the sheet from his arm to check on his cut, said, 

“Well, it didn’t help us tonight, whoever conjured it. It 
scared the Death Eaters away the moment they saw 
it. They all Disapparated before we’d got near enough 
to unmask any of them. We caught the Robertses 
before they hit the ground, though. They’re having 
their memories modified right now.” 

“Death Eaters?” said Harry. “What are Death Eaters?” 

“It’s what You-Know- Who’s supporters called 
themselves,” said Bill. “I think we saw what’s left of 
them tonight — the ones who managed to keep 
themselves out of Azkaban, anyway.” 

“We can’t prove it was them, Bill,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“Though it probably was,” he added hopelessly. 

“Yeah, I bet it was!” said Ron suddenly. “Dad, we met 
Draco Malfoy in the woods, and he as good as told us 
his dad was one of those nutters in masks! And we all 
know the Malfoys were right in with You-Know-Who!” 

“But what were Voldemort’s supporters — ” Harry 
began. Everybody flinched — like most of the 
wizarding world, the Weasleys always avoided saying 

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort’s name. “Sorry,” said Harry quickly. “What 
were You -Know- Who’s supporters up to, levitating 
Muggles? I mean, what was the point?” 

“The point?” said Mr. Weasley with a hollow laugh. 
“Harry, that’s their idea of fun. Half the Muggle 
killings back when You-Know-Who was in power were 
done for fun. I suppose they had a few drinks tonight 
and couldn’t resist reminding us all that lots of them 
are still at large. A nice little reunion for them,” he 
finished disgustedly. 

“But if they were the Death Eaters, why did they 
Disapparate when they saw the Dark Mark?” said 
Ron. “They’d have been pleased to see it, wouldn’t 
they?” 

“Use your brains, Ron,” said Bill. “If they really were 
Death Eaters, they worked very hard to keep out of 
Azkaban when You-Know-Who lost power, and told all 
sorts of lies about him forcing them to kill and torture 
people. I bet they’d be even more frightened than the 
rest of us to see him come back. They denied they’d 
ever been involved with him when he lost his powers, 
and went back to their daily lives. ... I don’t reckon 
he’d be over-pleased with them, do you?” 

“So ... whoever conjured the Dark Mark ...” said 
Hermione slowly, “were they doing it to show support 
for the Death Eaters, or to scare them away?” 

“Your guess is as good as ours, Hermione,” said Mr. 
Weasley. “But I’ll tell you this ... it was only the Death 
Eaters who ever knew how to conjure it. I’d be very 
surprised if the person who did it hadn’t been a Death 
Eater once, even if they’re not now. ... Listen, it’s very 
late, and if your mother hears what’s happened she’ll 
be worried sick. We’ll get a few more hours sleep and 
then try and get an early Portkey out of here.” 

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry got back into his bunk with his head buzzing. 
He knew he ought to feel exhausted: It was nearly 
three in the morning, but he felt wide-awake — wide- 
awake, and worried. 

Three days ago — it felt like much longer, but it had 
only been three days — he had awoken with his scar 
burning. And tonight, for the first time in thirteen 
years, Lord Voldemort’s mark had appeared in the 
sky. What did these things mean? 

He thought of the letter he had written to Sirius 
before leaving Privet Drive. Would Sirius have gotten 
it yet? When would he reply? Harry lay looking up at 
the canvas, but no flying fantasies came to him now 
to ease him to sleep, and it was a long time after 
Charlie’s snores filled the tent that Harry finally dozed 
off. 



Page | 159 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




10 




MAYHEM AT THE MINISTRY 

Mr. Weasley woke them after only a few hours sleep. 
He used magic to pack up the tents, and they left the 
campsite as quickly as possible, passing Mr. Roberts 
at the door of his cottage. Mr. Roberts had a strange, 
dazed look about him, and he waved them off with a 
vague “Merry Christmas.” 

“Hell be all right,” said Mr. Weasley quietly as they 
marched off onto the moor. “Sometimes, when a 
person’s memory’s modified, it makes him a bit 
disorientated for a while . . . and that was a big thing 
they had to make him forget.” 

They heard urgent voices as they approached the spot 
where the Portkeys lay, and when they reached it, 
they found a great number of witches and wizards 
gathered around Basil, the keeper of the Portkeys, all 
clamoring to get away from the campsite as quickly as 
possible. Mr. Weasley had a hurried discussion with 
Basil; they joined the queue, and were able to take an 
old rubber tire back to Stoatshead Hill before the sun 
had really risen. They walked back through Ottery St. 
Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Catchpole and up the damp lane toward the Burrow 
in the dawn light, talking very little because they were 
so exhausted, and thinking longingly of their 
breakfast. As they rounded the corner and the 
Burrow came into view, a cry echoed along the lane. 

“Oh thank goodness, thank goodness!” 

Mrs. Weasley, who had evidently been waiting for 
them in the front yard, came running toward them, 
still wearing her bedroom slippers, her face pale and 
strained, a rolled-up copy of the Daily Prophet 
clutched in her hand. 

“Arthur — I’ve been so worried — so worried — ” 

She flung her arms around Mr. Weasley’s neck, and 
the Daily Prophet fell out of her limp hand onto the 
ground. Looking down, Harry saw the headline: 
SCENES OF TERROR AT THE QUIDDITCH WORLD 
CUP, complete with a twinkling black-and-white 
photograph of the Dark Mark over the treetops. 

“You’re all right,” Mrs. Weasley muttered distractedly, 
releasing Mr. Weasley and staring around at them all 
with red eyes, “you’re alive. ... Oh boys ...” 

And to everybody’s surprise, she seized Fred and 
George and pulled them both into such a tight hug 
that their heads banged together. 

“ Ouch\ Mum — you’re strangling us — ” 

“I shouted at you before you left!” Mrs. Weasley said, 
starting to sob. “It’s all I’ve been thinking about! What 
if You-Know-Who had got you, and the last thing I 
ever said to you was that you didn’t get enough 
O.W.L.s? Oh Fred ... George ...” 



Page | 161 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, now, Molly, we’re all perfectly okay,” said 
Mr. Weasley soothingly, prising her off the twins and 
leading her back toward the house. “Bill,” he added in 
an undertone, “pick up that paper, I want to see what 
it says. ...” 

When they were all crammed into the tiny kitchen, 
and Hermione had made Mrs. Weasley a cup of very 
strong tea, into which Mr. Weasley insisted on 
pouring a shot of Ogdens Old Firewhiskey, Bill 
handed his father the newspaper. Mr. Weasley 
scanned the front page while Percy looked over his 
shoulder. 

“I knew it,” said Mr. Weasley heavily. “Ministry 
blunders ... culprits not apprehended ... lax security ... 
Dark wizards running unchecked . . . national disgrace 
... Who wrote this? Ah ... of course ... Rita Skeeter.” 

“That woman’s got it in for the Ministry of Magic!” 
said Percy furiously. “Last week she was saying we’re 
wasting our time quibbling about cauldron thickness, 
when we should be stamping out vampires! As if it 
wasn’t specifically stated in paragraph twelve of the 
Guidelines for the Treatment of Non-Wizard Part- 
Humans — ” 

“Do us a favor, Perce,” said Bill, yawning, “and shut 
up.” 

“I’m mentioned,” said Mr. Weasley, his eyes widening 
behind his glasses as he reached the bottom of the 
Daily Prophet article. 

“Where?” spluttered Mrs. Weasley, choking on her tea 
and whiskey. “If I’d seen that, I’d have known you 
were alive!” 



Page | 162 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Not by name,” said Mr. Weasley. “Listen to this: ‘If 
the terrified wizards and witches who waited 
breathlessly for news at the edge of the wood expected 
reassurance from the Ministry of Magic, they were 
sadly disappointed. A Ministry official emerged some 
time after the appearance of the Dark Mark alleging 
that nobody had been hurt, but refusing to give any 
more information. Whether this statement will be 
enough to quash the rumors that several bodies were 
removed from the woods an hour later, remains to be 
seen.’ Oh really,” said Mr. Weasley in exasperation, 
handing the paper to Percy. “Nobody was hurt. What 
was I supposed to say? Rumors that several bodies 
were removed from the woods ... well, there certainly 
will be rumors now she’s printed that.” 

He heaved a deep sigh. “Molly, I’m going to have to go 
into the office; this is going to take some smoothing 
over.” 

“I’ll come with you, Father,” said Percy importantly. 
“Mr. Crouch will need all hands on deck. And I can 
give him my cauldron report in person.” 

He bustled out of the kitchen. Mrs. Weasley looked 
most upset. 

“Arthur, you’re supposed to be on holiday! This hasn’t 
got anything to do with your office; surely they can 
handle this without you?” 

“I’ve got to go, Molly,” said Mr. Weasley. “I’ve made 
things worse. I’ll just change into my robes and I’ll be 
off. ...” 

“Mrs. Weasley,” said Harry suddenly, unable to 
contain himself, “Hedwig hasn’t arrived with a letter 
for me, has she?” 



Page | 163 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Hedwig, dear?” said Mrs. Weasley distractedly. “No ... 
no, there hasn’t been any post at all.” 

Ron and Hermione looked curiously at Harry. With a 
meaningful look at both of them he said, “All right if I 
go and dump my stuff in your room, Ron?” 

“Yeah ... think I will too,” said Ron at once. 
“Hermione?” 

“Yes,” she said quickly, and the three of them 
marched out of the kitchen and up the stairs. 

“What’s up, Harry?” said Ron, the moment they had 
closed the door of the attic room behind them. 

“There’s something I haven’t told you,” Harry said. 

“On Saturday morning, I woke up with my scar 
hurting again.” 

Ron’s and Hermione’s reactions were almost exactly 
as Harry had imagined them back in his bedroom on 
Privet Drive. Hermione gasped and started making 
suggestions at once, mentioning a number of 
reference books, and everybody from Albus 
Dumbledore to Madam Pomfrey, the Hogwarts nurse. 
Ron simply looked dumbstruck. 

“But — he wasn’t there, was he? You-Know-Who? I 
mean — last time your scar kept hurting, he was at 
Hogwarts, wasn’t he?” 

“I’m sure he wasn’t on Privet Drive,” said Harry. “But I 
was dreaming about him . . . him and Peter — you 
know, Wormtail. I can’t remember all of it now, but 
they were plotting to kill ... someone.” 



Page | 164 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He had teetered for a moment on the verge of saying 
“me,” but couldn’t bring himself to make Hermione 
look any more horrified than she already did. 

“It was only a dream,” said Ron bracingly. “Just a 
nightmare.” 

“Yeah, but was it, though?” said Harry, turning to 
look out of the window at the brightening sky. “It’s 
weird, isn’t it? ... My scar hurts, and three days later 
the Death Eaters are on the march, and Voldemort’s 
sign’s up in the sky again.” 

“Don’t — say — his — name!” Ron hissed through 
gritted teeth. 

“And remember what Professor Trelawney said?” 

Harry went on, ignoring Ron. “At the end of last 
year?” 

Professor Trelawney was their Divination teacher at 
Hogwarts. Hermione ’s terrified look vanished as she 
let out a derisive snort. 

“Oh Harry, you aren’t going to pay attention to 
anything that old fraud says?” 

“You weren’t there,” said Harry. “You didn’t hear her. 
This time was different. I told you, she went into a 
trance — a real one. And she said the Dark Lord 
would rise again . . . greater and more terrible than ever 
before ... and he’d manage it because his servant was 
going to go back to him ... and that night Wormtail 
escaped.” 

There was a silence in which Ron fidgeted 
absentmindedly with a hole in his Chudley Cannons 
bedspread. 



Page | 165 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Why were you asking if Hedwig had come, Harry?” 
Hermione asked. “Are you expecting a letter?” 

“I told Sirius about my scar,” said Harry, shrugging. 
“I’m waiting for his answer.” 

“Good thinking!” said Ron, his expression clearing. “I 
bet Sirius ’ll know what to do!” 

“I hoped he’d get back to me quickly,” said Harry. 

“But we don’t know where Sirius is ... he could be in 
Africa or somewhere, couldn’t he?” said Hermione 
reasonably. “Hedwig’s not going to manage that 
journey in a few days.” 

“Yeah, I know,” said Harry, but there was a leaden 
feeling in his stomach as he looked out of the window 
at the Hedwig-free sky. 

“Come and have a game of Quidditch in the orchard, 
Harry,” said Ron. “Come on — three on three, Bill and 
Charlie and Fred and George will play. ... You can try 
out the Wronski Feint. ...” 

“Ron,” said Hermione, in an I-don’t-think-you’re- 
being- very- sensitive sort of voice, “Harry doesn’t want 
to play Quidditch right now. ... He’s worried, and he’s 
tired. ... We all need to go to bed. ...” 

“Yeah, I want to play Quidditch,” said Harry 
suddenly. “Hang on, I’ll get my Firebolt.” 

Hermione left the room, muttering something that 
sounded very much like “Boys.” 

k k k 



Page | 166 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Neither Mr. Weasley nor Percy was at home much 
over the following week. Both left the house each 
morning before the rest of the family got up, and 
returned well after dinner every night. 

“It’s been an absolute uproar,” Percy told them 
importantly the Sunday evening before they were due 
to return to Hogwarts. “I’ve been putting out fires all 
week. People keep sending Howlers, and of course, if 
you don’t open a Howler straight away, it explodes. 
Scorch marks all over my desk and my best quill 
reduced to cinders.” 

“Why are they all sending Howlers?” asked Ginny, 
who was mending her copy of One Thousand Magical 
Herbs and Fungi with Spellotape on the rug in front of 
the living room fire. 

“Complaining about security at the World Cup,” said 
Percy. “They want compensation for their ruined 
property. Mundungus Fletcher’s put in a claim for a 
twelve-bedroomed tent with en-suite Jacuzzi, but I’ve 
got his number. I know for a fact he was sleeping 
under a cloak propped on sticks.” 

Mrs. Weasley glanced at the grandfather clock in the 
corner. Harry liked this clock. It was completely 
useless if you wanted to know the time, but otherwise 
very informative. It had nine golden hands, and each 
of them was engraved with one of the Weasley family’s 
names. There were no numerals around the face, but 
descriptions of where each family member might be. 
“Home,” “school,” and “work” were there, but there 
was also “traveling,” “lost,” “hospital,” “prison,” and, 
in the position where the number twelve would be on 
a normal clock, “mortal peril.” 

Eight of the hands were currently pointing to the 
“home” position, but Mr. Weasley’s, which was the 

Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




longest, was still pointing to “work.” Mrs. Weasley 
sighed. 



“Your father hasn’t had to go into the office on 
weekends since the days of You-Know-Who,” she said. 
“They’re working him far too hard. His dinner’s going 
to be mined if he doesn’t come home soon.” 

“Well, Father feels he’s got to make up for his mistake 
at the match, doesn’t he?” said Percy. “If truth be 
told, he was a tad unwise to make a public statement 
without clearing it with his Head of Department first 



“Don’t you dare blame your father for what that 
wretched Skeeter woman wrote!” said Mrs. Weasley, 
flaring up at once. 

“If Dad hadn’t said anything, old Rita would just have 
said it was disgraceful that nobody from the Ministry 
had commented,” said Bill, who was playing chess 
with Ron. “Rita Skeeter never makes anyone look 
good. Remember, she interviewed all the Gringotts’ 
Charm Breakers once, and called me ‘a long-haired 
pillock’?” 

“Well, it is a bit long, dear,” said Mrs. Weasley gently. 
“If you’d just let me — ” 

“No, Mum.” 

Rain lashed against the living room window. 

Hermione was immersed in The Standard Book of 
Spells, Grade 4, copies of which Mrs. Weasley had 
bought for her, Harry, and Ron in Diagon Alley. 
Charlie was darning a fireproof balaclava. Harry was 
polishing his Firebolt, the broomstick servicing kit 
Hermione had given him for his thirteenth birthday 
open at his feet. Fred and George were sitting in a far 
Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




corner, quills out, talking in whispers, their heads 
bent over a piece of parchment. 

“What are you two up to?” said Mrs. Weasley sharply, 
her eyes on the twins. 

“Homework,” said Fred vaguely. 

“Don’t be ridiculous, you’re still on holiday,” said Mrs. 
Weasley. 

“Yeah, we’ve left it a bit late,” said George. 

“You’re not by any chance writing out a new order 
form, are you?” said Mrs. Weasley shrewdly. “You 
wouldn’t be thinking of restarting Weasleys’ Wizard 
Wheezes, by any chance?” 

“Now, Mum,” said Fred, looking up at her, a pained 
look on his face. “If the Hogwarts Express crashed 
tomorrow, and George and I died, how would you feel 
to know that the last thing we ever heard from you 
was an unfounded accusation?” 

Everyone laughed, even Mrs. Weasley. 

“Oh your father’s coming!” she said suddenly, looking 
up at the clock again. 

Mr. Weasley’s hand had suddenly spun from “work” 
to “traveling”; a second later it had shuddered to a 
halt on “home” with the others, and they heard him 
calling from the kitchen. 

“Coming, Arthur!” called Mrs. Weasley, hurrying out 
of the room. 



Page | 169 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A few moments later, Mr. Weasley came into the 
warm living room carrying his dinner on a tray. He 
looked completely exhausted. 

“Well, the fat’s really in the fire now,” he told Mrs. 
Weasley as he sat down in an armchair near the 
hearth and toyed unenthusiastically with his 
somewhat shriveled cauliflower. “Rita Skeeter’s been 
ferreting around all week, looking for more Ministry 
mess-ups to report. And now she’s found out about 
poor old Bertha going missing, so that’ll be the 
headline in the Prophet tomorrow. I told Bagman he 
should have sent someone to look for her ages ago.” 

“Mr. Crouch has been saying it for weeks and weeks,” 
said Percy swiftly. 

“Crouch is very lucky Rita hasn’t found out about 
Winky,” said Mr. Weasley irritably. “There’d be a 
week’s worth of headlines in his house-elf being 
caught holding the wand that conjured the Dark 
Mark.” 

“I thought we were all agreed that that elf, while 
irresponsible, did not conjure the Mark?” said Percy 
hotly. 

“If you ask me, Mr. Crouch is very lucky no one at the 
Daily Prophet knows how mean he is to elves!” said 
Hermione angrily. 

“Now look here, Hermione!” said Percy. “A high- 
ranking Ministry official like Mr. Crouch deserves 
unswerving obedience from his servants — ” 

“His slave, you mean!” said Hermione, her voice rising 
passionately, “because he didn’t pay Winky, did he?” 



Page | 170 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I think you’d all better go upstairs and check that 
you’ve packed properly!” said Mrs. Weasley, breaking 
up the argument. “Come on now, all of you. ...” 

Harry repacked his broomstick servicing kit, put his 
Firebolt over his shoulder, and went back upstairs 
with Ron. The rain sounded even louder at the top of 
the house, accompanied by loud whistlings and 
moans from the wind, not to mention sporadic howls 
from the ghoul who lived in the attic. Pigwidgeon 
began twittering and zooming around his cage when 
they entered. The sight of the half-packed trunks 
seemed to have sent him into a frenzy of excitement. 

“Bung him some Owl Treats,” said Ron, throwing a 
packet across to Harry. “It might shut him up.” 

Harry poked a few Owl Treats through the bars of 
Pigwidgeon’s cage, then turned to his trunk. Hedwig’s 
cage stood next to it, still empty. 

“It’s been over a week,” Harry said, looking at 
Hedwig’s deserted perch. “Ron, you don’t reckon 
Sirius has been caught, do you?” 

“Nah, it would’ve been in the Daily Prophet,” said Ron. 
“The Ministry would want to show they’d caught 
someone, wouldn’t they?” 

“Yeah, I suppose. ...” 

“Look, here’s the stuff Mum got for you in Diagon 
Alley. And she’s got some gold out of your vault for 
you ... and she’s washed all your socks.” 

He heaved a pile of parcels onto Harry’s camp bed 
and dropped the money bag and a load of socks next 
to it. Harry started unwrapping the shopping. Apart 
from The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 4, by 

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Miranda Goshawk, he had a handful of new quills, a 
dozen rolls of parchment, and refills for his potion- 
making kit — he had been running low on spine of 
lionfish and essence of belladonna. He was just piling 
underwear into his cauldron when Ron made a loud 
noise of disgust behind him. 

“What is that supposed to be?” 

He was holding up something that looked to Harry 
like a long, maroon velvet dress. It had a moldy- 
looking lace frill at the collar and matching lace cuffs. 

There was a knock on the door, and Mrs. Weasley 
entered, carrying an armful of freshly laundered 
Hogwarts robes. 

“Here you are,” she said, sorting them into two piles. 
“Now, mind you pack them properly so they don’t 
crease.” 

“Mum, you’ve given me Ginny’s new dress,” said Ron, 
handing it out to her. 

“Of course I haven’t,” said Mrs. Weasley. “That’s for 
you. Dress robes.” 

“What?” said Ron, looking horror-struck. 

“Dress robes!” repeated Mrs. Weasley. “It says on your 
school list that you’re supposed to have dress robes 
this year ... robes for formal occasions.” 

“You’ve got to be kidding,” said Ron in disbelief. “I’m 
not wearing that, no way.” 

“Everyone wears them, Ron!” said Mrs. Weasley 
crossly. “They’re all like that! Your father’s got some 
for smart parties!” 

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ll go starkers before I put that on,” said Ron 
stubbornly. 

“Don’t be so silly,” said Mrs. Weasley. “You’ve got to 
have dress robes, they’re on your list! I got some for 
Harry too ... show him, Harry. ...” 

In some trepidation, Harry opened the last parcel on 
his camp bed. It wasn’t as bad as he had expected, 
however; his dress robes didn’t have any lace on them 
at all — in fact, they were more or less the same as 
his school ones, except that they were bottle green 
instead of black. 

“I thought they’d bring out the color of your eyes, 
dear,” said Mrs. Weasley fondly. 

“Well, they’re okay!” said Ron angrily, looking at 
Harry’s robes. “Why couldn’t I have some like that?” 

“Because ... well, I had to get yours secondhand, and 
there wasn’t a lot of choice!” said Mrs. Weasley, 
flushing. 

Harry looked away. He would willingly have split all 
the money in his Gringotts vault with the Weasleys, 
but he knew they would never take it. 

“I’m never wearing them,” Ron was saying stubbornly. 
“Never.” 

“Fine,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “Go naked. And, Harry, 
make sure you get a picture of him. Goodness knows 
I could do with a laugh.” 

She left the room, slamming the door behind her. 
There was a funny spluttering noise from behind 
them. Pigwidgeon was choking on an overlarge Owl 
Treat. 

Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Why is everything I own rubbish?” said Ron 
furiously, striding across the room to unstick 
Pigwidgeon’s beak. 



Page | 174 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






ABOARD THE HOGWARTS EXPRESS 

There was a definite end-of-the-holidays gloom in the 
air when Harry awoke next morning. Heavy rain was 
still splattering against the window as he got dressed 
in jeans and a sweatshirt; they would change into 
their school robes on the Hogwarts Express. 

He, Ron, Fred, and George had just reached the first- 
floor landing on their way down to breakfast, when 
Mrs. Weasley appeared at the foot of the stairs, 
looking harassed. 

“Arthur!” she called up the staircase. “Arthur! Urgent 
message from the Ministry!” 

Harry flattened himself against the wall as Mr. 
Weasley came clattering past with his robes on back- 
to-front and hurtled out of sight. When Harry and the 
others entered the kitchen, they saw Mrs. Weasley 
rummaging anxiously in the drawers — “I’ve got a 
quill here somewhere!” — and Mr. Weasley bending 
over the fire, talking to — 



Page | 175 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry shut his eyes hard and opened them again to 
make sure that they were working properly. 

Amos Diggory’s head was sitting in the middle of the 
flames like a large, bearded egg. It was talking very 
fast, completely unperturbed by the sparks flying 
around it and the flames licking its ears. 

"... Muggle neighbors heard bangs and shouting, so 
they went and called those what-d’you-call-’ems — 
please-men. Arthur, you’ve got to get over there — ” 

“Here!” said Mrs. Weasley breathlessly, pushing a 
piece of parchment, a bottle of ink, and a crumpled 
quill into Mr. Weasley’s hands. 

“ — it’s a real stroke of luck I heard about it,” said Mr. 
Diggory’s head. “I had to come into the office early to 
send a couple of owls, and I found the Improper Use 
of Magic lot all setting off — if Rita Skeeter gets hold 
of this one, Arthur — ” 

“What does Mad-Eye say happened?” asked Mr. 
Weasley, unscrewing the ink bottle, loading up his 
quill, and preparing to take notes. 

Mr. Diggory’s head rolled its eyes. “Says he heard an 
intruder in his yard. Says he was creeping toward the 
house, but was ambushed by his dustbins.” 

“What did the dustbins do?” asked Mr. Weasley, 
scribbling frantically. 

“Made one hell of a noise and fired rubbish 
everywhere, as far as I can tell,” said Mr. Diggory. 
“Apparently one of them was still rocketing around 
when the please-men turned up — ” 

Mr. Weasley groaned. 

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And what about the intruder?” 



“Arthur, you know Mad-Eye,” said Mr. Diggory’s head, 
rolling its eyes again. “Someone creeping into his yard 
in the dead of night? More likely there’s a very shell- 
shocked cat wandering around somewhere, covered in 
potato peelings. But if the Improper Use of Magic lot 
get their hands on Mad-Eye, he’s had it — think of 
his record — we’ve got to get him off on a minor 
charge, something in your department — what are 
exploding dustbins worth?” 

“Might be a caution,” said Mr. Weasley, still writing 
very fast, his brow furrowed. “Mad-Eye didn’t use his 
wand? He didn’t actually attack anyone?” 

“I’ll bet he leapt out of bed and started jinxing 
everything he could reach through the window,” said 
Mr. Diggory, “but they’ll have a job proving it, there 
aren’t any casualties.” 

“All right, I’m off,” Mr. Weasley said, and he stuffed 
the parchment with his notes on it into his pocket 
and dashed out of the kitchen again. 

Mr. Diggory’s head looked around at Mrs. Weasley. 

“Sorry about this, Molly,” it said, more calmly, 
“bothering you so early and everything . . . but Arthur’s 
the only one who can get Mad-Eye off, and Mad-Eye’s 
supposed to be starting his new job today. Why he 
had to choose last night ...” 

“Never mind, Amos,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Sure you 
won’t have a bit of toast or anything before you go?” 

“Oh go on, then,” said Mr. Diggory. 



Page | 177 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley took a piece of buttered toast from a 
stack on the kitchen table, put it into the fire tongs, 
and transferred it into Mr. Diggory’s mouth. 

“Fanks,” he said in a muffled voice, and then, with a 
small pop, vanished. 

Harry could hear Mr. Weasley calling hurried good- 
byes to Bill, Charlie, Percy, and the girls. Within five 
minutes, he was back in the kitchen, his robes on the 
right way now, dragging a comb through his hair. 

“I’d better hurry — you have a good term, boys,” said 
Mr. Weasley to Harry, Ron, and the twins, fastening a 
cloak over his shoulders and preparing to 
Disapparate. “Molly, are you going to be all right 
taking the kids to King’s Cross?” 

“Of course I will,” she said. “You just look after Mad- 
Eye, we’ll be fine.” 

As Mr. Weasley vanished, Bill and Charlie entered the 
kitchen. 

“Did someone say Mad-Eye?” Bill asked. “What’s he 
been up to now? 

“He says someone tried to break into his house last 
night,” said Mrs. Weasley. 

“Mad-Eye Moody?” said George thoughtfully, 
spreading marmalade on his toast. “Isn’t he that 
nutter — ” 

“Your father thinks very highly of Mad-Eye Moody,” 
said Mrs. Weasley sternly. 



Page | 178 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, well, Dad collects plugs, doesn’t he?” said Fred 
quietly as Mrs. Weasley left the room. “Birds of a 
feather ...” 

“Moody was a great wizard in his time,” said Bill. 

“He’s an old friend of Dumbledore’s, isn’t he?” said 
Charlie. 

“Dumbledore’s not what you’d call normal, though, is 
he?” said Fred. “I mean, I know he’s a genius and 
everything ...” 

“Who is Mad-Eye?” asked Harry. 

“He’s retired, used to work at the Ministry,” said 
Charlie. “I met him once when Dad took me into work 
with him. He was an Auror — one of the best ... a 
Dark wizard catcher,” he added, seeing Harry’s blank 
look. “Half the cells in Azkaban are full because of 
him. He made himself loads of enemies, though ... the 
families of people he caught, mainly . . . and I heard 
he’s been getting really paranoid in his old age. 
Doesn’t trust anyone anymore. Sees Dark wizards 
everywhere.” 

Bill and Charlie decided to come and see everyone off 
at King’s Cross station, but Percy, apologizing most 
profusely, said that he really needed to get to work. 

“I just can’t justify taking more time off at the 
moment,” he told them. “Mr. Crouch is really starting 
to rely on me.” 

“Yeah, you know what, Percy?” said George seriously. 
“I reckon he’ll know your name soon.” 



Page | 179 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley had braved the telephone in the village 
post office to order three ordinary Muggle taxis to take 
them into London. 



“Arthur tried to borrow Ministry cars for us,” Mrs. 
Weasley whispered to Harry as they stood in the rain- 
washed yard, watching the taxi drivers heaving six 
heavy Hogwarts trunks into their cars. “But there 
weren’t any to spare. ... Oh dear, they don’t look 
happy, do they?” 

Harry didn’t like to tell Mrs. Weasley that Muggle taxi 
drivers rarely transported overexcited owls, and 
Pigwidgeon was making an earsplitting racket. Nor 
did it help that a number of Filibuster’s Fabulous 
Wet-Start, No-Heat Fireworks went off unexpectedly 
when Fred’s trunk sprang open, causing the driver 
carrying it to yell with fright and pain as Crookshanks 
clawed his way up the man’s leg. 

The journey was uncomfortable, owing to the fact that 
they were jammed in the back of the taxis with their 
trunks. Crookshanks took quite a while to recover 
from the fireworks, and by the time they entered 
London, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were all severely 
scratched. They were very relieved to get out at King’s 
Cross, even though the rain was coming down harder 
than ever, and they got soaked carrying their trunks 
across the busy road and into the station. 

Harry was used to getting onto platform nine and 
three-quarters by now. It was a simple matter of 
walking straight through the apparently solid barrier 
dividing platforms nine and ten. The only tricky part 
was doing this in an unobtrusive way, so as to avoid 
attracting Muggle attention. They did it in groups 
today; Harry, Ron, and Hermione (the most 
conspicuous, since they were accompanied by 
Pigwidgeon and Crookshanks) went first; they leaned 
Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




casually against the barrier, chatting unconcernedly, 
and slid sideways through it ... and as they did so, 
platform nine and three-quarters materialized in front 
of them. 

The Hogwarts Express, a gleaming scarlet steam 
engine, was already there, clouds of steam billowing 
from it, through which the many Hogwarts students 
and parents on the platform appeared like dark 
ghosts. Pigwidgeon became noisier than ever in 
response to the hooting of many owls through the 
mist. Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off to find seats, 
and were soon stowing their luggage in a 
compartment halfway along the train. They then 
hopped back down onto the platform to say good-bye 
to Mrs. Weasley, Bill, and Charlie. 

“I might be seeing you all sooner than you think,” 
said Charlie, grinning, as he hugged Ginny good-bye. 

“Why?” said Fred keenly. 

“You’ll see,” said Charlie. “Just don’t tell Percy I 
mentioned it ... it’s ‘classified information, until such 
time as the Ministry sees fit to release it,’ after all.” 

“Yeah, I sort of wish I were back at Hogwarts this 
year,” said Bill, hands in his pockets, looking almost 
wistfully at the train. 

“Why?” said George impatiently. 

“You’re going to have an interesting year,” said Bill, 
his eyes twinkling. “I might even get time off to come 
and watch a bit of it. ...” 

“A bit of what?” said Ron. 



Page | 181 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But at that moment, the whistle blew, and Mrs. 
Weasley chivvied them toward the train doors. 

“Thanks for having us to stay, Mrs. Weasley,” said 
Hermione as they climbed on board, closed the door, 
and leaned out of the window to talk to her. 

“Yeah, thanks for everything, Mrs. Weasley,” said 
Harry. 

“Oh it was my pleasure, dears,” said Mrs. Weasley. 
“Td invite you for Christmas, but ... well, I expect 
you’re all going to want to stay at Hogwarts, what 
with ... one thing and another.” 

“Mum!” said Ron irritably. “What d’you three know 
that we don’t?” 

“You’ll find out this evening, I expect,” said Mrs. 
Weasley, smiling. “It’s going to be very exciting — 
mind you, I’m very glad they’ve changed the rules — ” 

“What rules?” said Harry, Ron, Fred, and George 
together. 

“I’m sure Professor Dumbledore will tell you. ... Now, 
behave, won’t you? Won’t you, Fred? And you, 
George?” 

The pistons hissed loudly and the train began to 
move. 

“Tell us what’s happening at Hogwarts!” Fred 
bellowed out of the window as Mrs. Weasley, Bill, and 
Charlie sped away from them. “What rules are they 
changing?” 



Page | 182 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But Mrs. Weasley only smiled and waved. Before the 
train had rounded the corner, she, Bill, and Charlie 
had Disapparated. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went back to their 
compartment. The thick rain splattering the windows 
made it very difficult to see out of them. Ron undid 
his trunk, pulled out his maroon dress robes, and 
flung them over Pigwidgeon’s cage to muffle his 
hooting. 

“Bagman wanted to tell us what’s happening at 
Hogwarts,” he said grumpily, sitting down next to 
Harry. “At the World Cup, remember? But my own 
mother won’t say. Wonder what — ” 

“Shh!” Hermione whispered suddenly, pressing her 
finger to her lips and pointing toward the 
compartment next to theirs. Harry and Ron listened, 
and heard a familiar drawling voice drifting in 
through the open door. 

"... Father actually considered sending me to 
Durmstrang rather than Hogwarts, you know. He 
knows the headmaster, you see. Well, you know his 
opinion of Dumbledore — the man’s such a 
Mudblood-lover — and Durmstrang doesn’t admit 
that sort of riffraff. But Mother didn’t like the idea of 
me going to school so far away. Father says 
Durmstrang takes a far more sensible line than 
Hogwarts about the Dark Arts. Durmstrang students 
actually learn them, not just the defense rubbish we 
do. ...” 

Hermione got up, tiptoed to the compartment door, 
and slid it shut, blocking out Malfoy’s voice. 



Page | 183 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“So he thinks Durmstrang would have suited him, 
does he?” she said angrily. “I wish he had gone, then 
we wouldn’t have to put up with him.” 

“Durmstrang’s another wizarding school?” said Harry. 

“Yes,” said Hermione sniffily, “and it’s got a horrible 
reputation. According to An Appraisal of Magical 
Education in Europe, it puts a lot of emphasis on the 
Dark Arts.” 

“I think I’ve heard of it,” said Ron vaguely. “Where is 
it? What country?” 

“Well, nobody knows, do they?” said Hermione, 
raising her eyebrows. 

“Er — why not?” said Harry. 

“There’s traditionally been a lot of rivalry between all 
the magic schools. Durmstrang and Beauxbatons like 
to conceal their whereabouts so nobody can steal 
their secrets,” said Hermione matter-of-factly. 

“Come off it,” said Ron, starting to laugh. 
“Durmstrang’s got to be about the same size as 
Hogwarts — how are you going to hide a great big 
castle?” 

“But Hogwarts is hidden,” said Hermione, in surprise. 
“Everyone knows that ... well, everyone who’s read 
Hogwarts, A History, anyway.” 

“Just you, then,” said Ron. “So go on — how d’you 
hide a place like Hogwarts?” 

“It’s bewitched,” said Hermione. “If a Muggle looks at 
it, all they see is a moldering old ruin with a sign over 



Page | 184 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the entrance saying DANGER, DO NOT ENTER, 
UNSAFE.” 

“So Durmstrangll just look like a min to an outsider 
too?” 

“Maybe,” said Hermione, shrugging, “or it might have 
Muggle-repelling charms on it, like the World Cup 
stadium. And to keep foreign wizards from finding it, 
they’ll have made it Unplottable — ” 

“Come again?” 

“Well, you can enchant a building so it’s impossible to 
plot on a map, can’t you?” 

“Er ... if you say so,” said Harry. 

“But I think Durmstrang must be somewhere in the 
far north,” said Hermione thoughtfully. “Somewhere 
very cold, because they’ve got fur capes as part of 
their uniforms.” 

“Ah, think of the possibilities,” said Ron dreamily. “It 
would’ve been so easy to push Malfoy off a glacier and 
make it look like an accident. ... Shame his mother 
likes him. ...” 

The rain became heavier and heavier as the train 
moved farther north. The sky was so dark and the 
windows so steamy that the lanterns were lit by 
midday. The lunch trolley came rattling along the 
corridor, and Harry bought a large stack of Cauldron 
Cakes for them to share. 

Several of their friends looked in on them as the 
afternoon progressed, including Seamus Finnigan, 
Dean Thomas, and Neville Longbottom, a round- 
faced, extremely forgetful boy who had been brought 

Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




up by his formidable witch of a grandmother. Seamus 
was still wearing his Ireland rosette. Some of its 
magic seemed to be wearing off now; it was still 
squeaking “ Troy — Mullet — Moran\” but in a very 
feeble and exhausted sort of way. After half an hour 
or so, Hermione, growing tired of the endless 
Quidditch talk, buried herself once more in The 
Standard Book of Spells, Grade 4, and started trying 
to learn a Summoning Charm. 

Neville listened jealously to the others’ conversation 
as they relived the Cup match. 

“Gran didn’t want to go,” he said miserably. “Wouldn’t 
buy tickets. It sounded amazing though.” 

“It was,” said Ron. “Look at this, Neville. ...” 

He rummaged in his trunk up in the luggage rack and 
pulled out the miniature figure of Viktor Krum. 

“Oh wow,” said Neville enviously as Ron tipped Krum 
onto his pudgy hand. 

“We saw him right up close, as well,” said Ron. “We 
were in the Top Box — ” 

“For the first and last time in your life, Weasley.” 

Draco Malfoy had appeared in the doorway. Behind 
him stood Crabbe and Goyle, his enormous, thuggish 
cronies, both of whom appeared to have grown at 
least a foot during the summer. Evidently they had 
overheard the conversation through the compartment 
door, which Dean and Seamus had left ajar. 

“Don’t remember asking you to join us, Malfoy,” said 
Harry coolly. 



Page | 186 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Weasley ... what is that?” said Malfoy, pointing at 
Pigwidgeon’s cage. A sleeve of Ron’s dress robes was 
dangling from it, swaying with the motion of the train, 
the moldy lace cuff very obvious. 

Ron made to stuff the robes out of sight, but Malfoy 
was too quick for him; he seized the sleeve and 
pulled. 

“Look at this!” said Malfoy in ecstasy, holding up 
Ron’s robes and showing Crabbe and Goyle, “Weasley, 
you weren’t thinking of wearing these, were you? I 
mean — they were very fashionable in about eighteen 
ninety. ...” 

“Eat dung, Malfoy!” said Ron, the same color as the 
dress robes as he snatched them back out of Malfoy’s 
grip. Malfoy howled with derisive laughter; Crabbe 
and Goyle guffawed stupidly. 

“So ... going to enter, Weasley? Going to try and bring 
a bit of glory to the family name? There’s money 
involved as well, you know ... you’d be able to afford 
some decent robes if you won. ...” 

“What are you talking about?” snapped Ron. 

“ Are you going to enter?” Malfoy repeated. “I suppose 
you will, Potter? You never miss a chance to show off, 
do you?” 

“Either explain what you’re on about or go away, 
Malfoy,” said Hermione testily, over the top of The 
Standard Book of Spells, Grade 4. 

A gleeful smile spread across Malfoy’s pale face. 

“Don’t tell me you don’t know?” he said delightedly. 
“You’ve got a father and brother at the Ministry and 

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you don’t even know ? My God, my father told me 
about it ages ago ... heard it from Cornelius Fudge. 
But then, Father’s always associated with the top 
people at the Ministry. . . . Maybe your father’s too 
junior to know about it, Weasley ... yes ... they 
probably don’t talk about important stuff in front of 
him. ...” 

Laughing once more, Malfoy beckoned to Crabbe and 
Goyle, and the three of them disappeared. 

Ron got to his feet and slammed the sliding 
compartment door so hard behind them that the glass 
shattered. 

“Ronl” said Hermione reproachfully, and she pulled 
out her wand, muttered “ ReparoV ’ and the glass 
shards flew back into a single pane and back into the 
door. 

“Well ... making it look like he knows everything and 
we don’t. ...” Ron snarled. “ ‘Father’s always 
associated with the top people at the Ministry.’... Dad 
could’ve got a promotion any time ... he just likes it 
where he is. ...” 

“Of course he does,” said Hermione quietly. “Don’t let 
Malfoy get to you, Ron — ” 

“Him! Get to me!? As if!” said Ron, picking up one of 
the remaining Cauldron Cakes and squashing it into 
a pulp. 

Ron’s bad mood continued for the rest of the journey. 
He didn’t talk much as they changed into their school 
robes, and was still glowering when the Hogwarts 
Express slowed down at last and finally stopped in 
the pitch-darkness of Hogsmeade station. 



Page | 188 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




As the train doors opened, there was a rumble of 
thunder overhead. Hermione bundled up 
Crookshanks in her cloak and Ron left his dress 
robes over Pigwidgeon as they left the train, heads 
bent and eyes narrowed against the downpour. The 
rain was now coming down so thick and fast that it 
was as though buckets of ice-cold water were being 
emptied repeatedly over their heads. 

“Hi, Hagrid!” Harry yelled, seeing a gigantic silhouette 
at the far end of the platform. 

“All righ’, Harry?” Hagrid bellowed back, waving. “See 
yeh at the feast if we don’ drown!” 

First years traditionally reached Hogwarts Castle by 
sailing across the lake with Hagrid. 

“Oooh, I wouldn’t fancy crossing the lake in this 
weather,” said Hermione fervently, shivering as they 
inched slowly along the dark platform with the rest of 
the crowd. A hundred horseless carriages stood 
waiting for them outside the station. Harry, Ron, 
Hermione, and Neville climbed gratefully into one of 
them, the door shut with a snap, and a few moments 
later, with a great lurch, the long procession of 
carriages was rumbling and splashing its way up the 
track toward Hogwarts Castle. 



Page | 189 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT 

Through the gates, flanked with statues of winged 
boars, and up the sweeping drive the carriages 
trundled, swaying dangerously in what was fast 
becoming a gale. Leaning against the window, Harry 
could see Hogwarts coming nearer, its many lighted 
windows blurred and shimmering behind the thick 
curtain of rain. Lightning flashed across the sky as 
their carriage came to a halt before the great oak front 
doors, which stood at the top of a flight of stone steps. 
People who had occupied the carriages in front were 
already hurrying up the stone steps into the castle. 
Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Neville jumped down from 
their carriage and dashed up the steps too, looking up 
only when they were safely inside the cavernous, 
torch-lit entrance hall, with its magnificent marble 
staircase. 

“Blimey,” said Ron, shaking his head and sending 
water everywhere, “if that keeps up the lake’s going to 
overflow. I’m soak — ARRGH!” 



Page | 190 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



A large, red, water-filled balloon had dropped from 
out of the ceiling onto Ron’s head and exploded. 
Drenched and sputtering, Ron staggered sideways 
into Harry, just as a second water bomb dropped — 
narrowly missing Hermione, it burst at Harry’s feet, 
sending a wave of cold water over his sneakers into 
his socks. People all around them shrieked and 
started pushing one another in their efforts to get out 
of the line of fire. Harry looked up and saw, floating 
twenty feet above them, Peeves the Poltergeist, a little 
man in a bell-covered hat and orange bow tie, his 
wide, malicious face contorted with concentration as 
he took aim again. 

“PEEVES!” yelled an angry voice. “Peeves, come down 
here at ONCE!” 

Professor McGonagall, Deputy Headmistress and 
head of Gryffindor House, had come dashing out of 
the Great Hall; she skidded on the wet floor and 
grabbed Hermione around the neck to stop herself 
from falling. 

“Ouch — sorry, Miss Granger — ” 

“That’s all right, Professor!” Hermione gasped, 
massaging her throat. 

“Peeves, get down here NOW!” barked Professor 
McGonagall, straightening her pointed hat and 
glaring upward through her square-rimmed 
spectacles. 

“Not doing nothing!” cackled Peeves, lobbing a water 
bomb at several fifth-year girls, who screamed and 
dived into the Great Hall. “Already wet, aren’t they? 
Little squirts! Wheeeeeeeeee!” And he aimed another 
bomb at a group of second years who had just 
arrived. 

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I shall call the headmaster!” shouted Professor 
McGonagall. “I’m warning you, Peeves — ” 

Peeves stuck out his tongue, threw the last of his 
water bombs into the air, and zoomed off up the 
marble staircase, cackling insanely. 

“Well, move along, then!” said Professor McGonagall 
sharply to the bedraggled crowd. “Into the Great Hall, 
come on!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione slipped and slid across the 
entrance hall and through the double doors on the 
right, Ron muttering furiously under his breath as he 
pushed his sopping hair off his face. 

The Great Hall looked its usual splendid self, 
decorated for the start-of-term feast. Golden plates 
and goblets gleamed by the light of hundreds and 
hundreds of candles, floating over the tables in 
midair. The four long House tables were packed with 
chattering students; at the top of the Hall, the staff 
sat along one side of a fifth table, facing their pupils. 

It was much warmer in here. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione walked past the Slytherins, the 
Ravenclaws, and the Hufflepuffs, and sat down with 
the rest of the Gryffindors at the far side of the Hall, 
next to Nearly Headless Nick, the Gryffindor ghost. 
Pearly white and semitransparent, Nick was dressed 
tonight in his usual doublet, but with a particularly 
large ruff, which served the dual purpose of looking 
extra-festive, and insuring that his head didn’t wobble 
too much on his partially severed neck. 

“Good evening,” he said, beaming at them. 

“Says who?” said Harry, taking off his sneakers and 
emptying them of water. “Hope they hurry up with the 
Sorting. I’m starving.” 

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The Sorting of the new students into Houses took 
place at the start of every school year, but by an 
unlucky combination of circumstances, Harry hadn’t 
been present at one since his own. He was quite 
looking forward to it. Just then, a highly excited, 
breathless voice called down the table. 

“Hiya, Harry!” 

It was Colin Creevey, a third year to whom Harry was 
something of a hero. 

“Hi, Colin,” said Harry warily. 

“Harry, guess what? Guess what, Harry? My brother’s 
starting! My brother Dennis!” 

“Er — good,” said Harry. 

“He’s really excited!” said Colin, practically bouncing 
up and down in his seat. “I just hope he’s in 
Gryffindor! Keep your fingers crossed, eh, Harry?” 

“Er — yeah, all right,” said Harry. He turned back to 
Hermione, Ron, and Nearly Headless Nick. “Brothers 
and sisters usually go in the same Houses, don’t 
they?” he said. He was judging by the Weasleys, all 
seven of whom had been put into Gryffindor. 

“Oh no, not necessarily,” said Hermione. “Parvati 
Patil’s twin’s in Ravenclaw, and they’re identical. 
You’d think they’d be together, wouldn’t you?” 

Harry looked up at the staff table. There seemed to be 
rather more empty seats there than usual. Hagrid, of 
course, was still fighting his way across the lake with 
the first years; Professor McGonagall was presumably 
supervising the drying of the entrance hall floor, but 



Page | 193 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




there was another empty chair too, and Harry 
couldn’t think who else was missing. 

“Where’s the new Defense Against the Dark Arts 
teacher?” said Hermione, who was also looking up at 
the teachers. 

They had never yet had a Defense Against the Dark 
Arts teacher who had lasted more than three terms. 
Harry’s favorite by far had been Professor Lupin, who 
had resigned last year. He looked up and down the 
staff table. There was definitely no new face there. 

“Maybe they couldn’t get anyone!” said Hermione, 
looking anxious. 

Harry scanned the table more carefully. Tiny little 
Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, was sitting on 
a large pile of cushions beside Professor Sprout, the 
Herbology teacher, whose hat was askew over her 
flyaway gray hair. She was talking to Professor 
Sinistra of the Astronomy department. On Professor 
Sinistra ’s other side was the sallow-faced, hook- 
nosed, greasy-haired Potions master, Snape — 

Harry’s least favorite person at Hogwarts. Harry’s 
loathing of Snape was matched only by Snape ’s 
hatred of him, a hatred which had, if possible, 
intensified last year, when Harry had helped Sirius 
escape right under Snape ’s overlarge nose — Snape 
and Sirius had been enemies since their own school 
days. 

On Snape ’s other side was an empty seat, which 
Harry guessed was Professor McGonagall’s. Next to it, 
and in the very center of the table, sat Professor 
Dumbledore, the headmaster, his sweeping silver hair 
and beard shining in the candlelight, his magnificent 
deep green robes embroidered with many stars and 
moons. The tips of Dumbledore ’s long, thin fingers 
Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




were together and he was resting his chin upon them, 
staring up at the ceiling through his half-moon 
spectacles as though lost in thought. Harry glanced 
up at the ceiling too. It was enchanted to look like the 
sky outside, and he had never seen it look this 
stormy. Black and purple clouds were swirling across 
it, and as another thunderclap sounded outside, a 
fork of lightning flashed across it. 

“Oh hurry up,” Ron moaned, beside Harry, “I could 
eat a hippogriff.” 

The words were no sooner out of his mouth than the 
doors of the Great Hall opened and silence fell. 
Professor McGonagall was leading a long line of first 
years up to the top of the Hall. If Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione were wet, it was nothing to how these first 
years looked. They appeared to have swum across the 
lake rather than sailed. All of them were shivering 
with a combination of cold and nerves as they filed 
along the staff table and came to a halt in a line 
facing the rest of the school — all of them except the 
smallest of the lot, a boy with mousy hair, who was 
wrapped in what Harry recognized as Hagrid’s 
moleskin overcoat. The coat was so big for him that it 
looked as though he were draped in a furry black 
circus tent. His small face protruded from over the 
collar, looking almost painfully excited. When he had 
lined up with his terrified-looking peers, he caught 
Colin Creevey’s eye, gave a double thumbs-up, and 
mouthed, I fell in the lake\ He looked positively 
delighted about it. 

Professor McGonagall now placed a three-legged stool 
on the ground before the first years and, on top of it, 
an extremely old, dirty, patched wizard’s hat. The first 
years stared at it. So did everyone else. For a 
moment, there was silence. Then a long tear near the 



Page | 195 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




brim opened wide like a mouth, and the hat broke 
into song: 

A thousand years or more ago, 

When I was newly sewn, 

There lived four wizards of renown, 

Whose names are still well known: 

Bold Gryffindor, from wild moor, 

Fair Ravenclaw, from glen, 

Sweet Hufflepuff, from valley broad, 

Shrewd Slytherin, from fen. 

They shared a wish, a hope, a dream, 

They hatched a daring plan 
To educate young sorcerers 
Thus Hogwarts School began. 

Now each of these four founders 
Formed their own house, for each 
Did value different virtues 
In the ones they had to teach. 

By Gryffindor, the bravest were 
Prized far beyond the rest; 

For Ravenclaw, the cleverest 
Would always be the best; 

For Hufflepuff, hard workers were 
Most worthy of admission; 

And power-hungry Slytherin 
Loved those of great ambition. 

While still alive they did divide 
Their favorites from the throng, 

Yet how to pick the worthy ones 
When they were dead and gone? 

Twas Gryffindor who found the way, 

He whipped me off his head 

The founders put some brains in me 

So I could choose instead! 

Now slip me snug about your ears, 

I’ve never yet been wrong, 

111 have a look inside your mind 
And tell where you belong! 

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The Great Hall rang with applause as the Sorting Hat 
finished. 



“That’s not the song it sang when it Sorted us,” said 
Harry, clapping along with everyone else. 

“Sings a different one every year,” said Ron. “It’s got 
to be a pretty boring life, hasn’t it, being a hat? I 
suppose it spends all year making up the next one.” 

Professor McGonagall was now unrolling a large scroll 
of parchment. 

“When I call out your name, you will put on the hat 
and sit on the stool,” she told the first years. “When 
the hat announces your House, you will go and sit at 
the appropriate table. 

“Ackerley, Stewart!” 

A boy walked forward, visibly trembling from head to 
foot, picked up the Sorting Hat, put it on, and sat 
down on the stool. 

“RAVENCLAW!” shouted the hat. 

Stewart Ackerley took off the hat and hurried into a 
seat at the Ravenclaw table, where everyone was 
applauding him. Harry caught a glimpse of Cho, the 
Ravenclaw Seeker, cheering Stewart Ackerley as he 
sat down. For a fleeting second, Harry had a strange 
desire to join the Ravenclaw table too. 

“Baddock, Malcolm!” 

“SLYTHERIN!” 

The table on the other side of the hall erupted with 
cheers; Harry could see Malfoy clapping as Baddock 

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




joined the Slytherins. Harry wondered whether 
Baddock knew that Slytherin House had turned out 
more Dark witches and wizards than any other. Fred 
and George hissed Malcolm Baddock as he sat down. 

“Branstone, Eleanor!” 

“HUFFLEPUFF!” 

“Cauldwell, Owen!” 

“HUFFLEPUFF!” 

“Creevey, Dennis!” 

Tiny Dennis Creevey staggered forward, tripping over 
Hagrid ’s moleskin, just as Hagrid himself sidled into 
the Hall through a door behind the teachers’ table. 
About twice as tall as a normal man, and at least 
three times as broad, Hagrid, with his long, wild, 
tangled black hair and beard, looked slightly alarming 
— a misleading impression, for Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione knew Hagrid to possess a very kind nature. 
He winked at them as he sat down at the end of the 
staff table and watched Dennis Creevey putting on 
the Sorting Hat. The rip at the brim opened wide — 

“GRYFFINDOR!” the hat shouted. 

Hagrid clapped along with the Gryffindors as Dennis 
Creevey, beaming widely, took off the hat, placed it 
back on the stool, and hurried over to join his 
brother. 

“Colin, I fell in!” he said shrilly, throwing himself into 
an empty seat. “It was brilliant! And something in the 
water grabbed me and pushed me back in the boat!” 



Page | 198 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Cool!” said Colin, just as excitedly. “It was probably 
the giant squid, Dennis!” 

“Wow\” said Dennis, as though nobody in their 
wildest dreams could hope for more than being 
thrown into a storm-tossed, fathoms-deep lake, and 
pushed out of it again by a giant sea monster. 

“Dennis! Dennis! See that boy down there? The one 
with the black hair and glasses? See him? Know who 
he is, Dennis ?” 

Harry looked away, staring very hard at the Sorting 
Hat, now Sorting Emma Dobbs. 

The Sorting continued; boys and girls with varying 
degrees of fright on their faces moving one by one to 
the three-legged stool, the line dwindling slowly as 
Professor McGonagall passed the L’s. 

“Oh hurry up,” Ron moaned, massaging his stomach. 

“Now, Ron, the Sorting’s much more important than 
food,” said Nearly Headless Nick as “Madley, Laura!” 
became a Hufflepuff. 

“ ’Course it is, if you’re dead,” snapped Ron. 

“I do hope this year’s batch of Gryffindors are up to 
scratch,” said Nearly Headless Nick, applauding as 
“McDonald, Natalie!” joined the Gryffindor table. “We 
don’t want to break our winning streak, do we?” 

Gryffindor had won the Inter-House Championship 
for the last three years in a row. 

“Pritchard, Graham!” 

“SLYTHERIN!” 

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Quirke, Orla!” 



“RAVENCLAW!” 

And finally, with “Whitby, Kevin!” (“HUFFLEPUFF!”), 
the Sorting ended. Professor McGonagall picked up 
the hat and the stool and carried them away. 

“About time,” said Ron, seizing his knife and fork and 
looking expectantly at his golden plate. 

Professor Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. He was 
smiling around at the students, his arms opened wide 
in welcome. 

“I have only two words to say to you,” he told them, 
his deep voice echoing around the Hall. “ Tuck in.” 

“Hear, hear!” said Harry and Ron loudly as the empty 
dishes filled magically before their eyes. 

Nearly Headless Nick watched mournfully as Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione loaded their own plates. 

“Aaah, ’at’s be’er,” said Ron, with his mouth full of 
mashed potato. 

“You’re lucky there’s a feast at all tonight, you know,” 
said Nearly Headless Nick. “There was trouble in the 
kitchens earlier.” 

“Why? Wha’ ’appened?” said Harry, through a sizable 
chunk of steak. 

“Peeves, of course,” said Nearly Headless Nick, 
shaking his head, which wobbled dangerously. He 
pulled his ruff a little higher up on his neck. “The 
usual argument, you know. He wanted to attend the 
feast — well, it’s quite out of the question, you know 
Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




what he’s like, utterly uncivilized, can’t see a plate of 
food without throwing it. We held a ghost’s council — 
the Fat Friar was all for giving him the chance — but 
most wisely, in my opinion, the Bloody Baron put his 
foot down.” 

The Bloody Baron was the Slytherin ghost, a gaunt 
and silent specter covered in silver bloodstains. He 
was the only person at Hogwarts who could really 
control Peeves. 

“Yeah, we thought Peeves seemed hacked off about 
something,” said Ron darkly. “So what did he do in 
the kitchens?” 

“Oh the usual,” said Nearly Headless Nick, shrugging. 
“Wreaked havoc and mayhem. Pots and pans 
everywhere. Place swimming in soup. Terrified the 
house-elves out of their wits — ” 

Clang. 

Hermione had knocked over her golden goblet. 
Pumpkin juice spread steadily over the tablecloth, 
staining several feet of white linen orange, but 
Hermione paid no attention. 

“There are house-elves here?” she said, staring, 
horror-struck, at Nearly Headless Nick. “Here at 
Hogwarts ?” 

“Certainly,” said Nearly Headless Nick, looking 
surprised at her reaction. “The largest number in any 
dwelling in Britain, I believe. Over a hundred.” 

“I’ve never seen one!” said Hermione. 

“Well, they hardly ever leave the kitchen by day, do 
they?” said Nearly Headless Nick. “They come out at 

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




night to do a bit of cleaning . . . see to the fires and so 
on. ... I mean, you’re not supposed to see them, are 
you? That’s the mark of a good house-elf, isn’t it, that 
you don’t know it’s there?” 

Hermione stared at him. 

“But they get paid?” she said. “They get holidays, 
don’t they? And — and sick leave, and pensions, and 
everything?” 

Nearly Headless Nick chortled so much that his ruff 
slipped and his head flopped off, dangling on the inch 
or so of ghostly skin and muscle that still attached it 
to his neck. 

“Sick leave and pensions?” he said, pushing his head 
back onto his shoulders and securing it once more 
with his ruff. “House-elves don’t want sick leave and 
pensions!” 

Hermione looked down at her hardly touched plate of 
food, then put her knife and fork down upon it and 
pushed it away from her. 

“Oh c’mon, ’Er-my-knee,” said Ron, accidentally 
spraying Harry with bits of Yorkshire pudding. “Oops 
— sorry, ’Arry — ” He swallowed. “You won’t get them 
sick leave by starving yourself!” 

“Slave labor,” said Hermione, breathing hard through 
her nose. “That’s what made this dinner. Slave labor.” 

And she refused to eat another bite. 

The rain was still drumming heavily against the high, 
dark glass. Another clap of thunder shook the 
windows, and the stormy ceiling flashed, illuminating 



Page | 202 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the golden plates as the remains of the first course 
vanished and were replaced, instantly, with puddings. 

“Treacle tart, Hermione!” said Ron, deliberately 
wafting its smell toward her. “Spotted dick, look! 
Chocolate gateau!” 

But Hermione gave him a look so reminiscent of 
Professor McGonagall that he gave up. 

When the puddings too had been demolished, and the 
last crumbs had faded off the plates, leaving them 
sparkling clean, Albus Dumbledore got to his feet 
again. The buzz of chatter filling the Hall ceased 
almost at once, so that only the howling wind and 
pounding rain could be heard. 

“So!” said Dumbledore, smiling around at them all. 
“Now that we are all fed and watered,” (“Hmph!” said 
Hermione) “I must once more ask for your attention, 
while I give out a few notices. 

“Mr. Filch, the caretaker, has asked me to tell you 
that the list of objects forbidden inside the castle has 
this year been extended to include Screaming Yo-yos, 
Fanged Frisbees, and Ever-Bashing Boomerangs. The 
full list comprises some four hundred and thirty- 
seven items, I believe, and can be viewed in Mr. 

Filch ’s office, if anybody would like to check it.” 

The corners of Dumbledore ’s mouth twitched. He 
continued, “As ever, I would like to remind you all 
that the forest on the grounds is out-of-bounds to 
students, as is the village of Hogsmeade to all below 
third year. 

“It is also my painful duty to inform you that the 
Inter-House Quidditch Cup will not take place this 
year.” 

Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” Harry gasped. He looked around at Fred and 
George, his fellow members of the Quidditch team. 
They were mouthing soundlessly at Dumbledore, 
apparently too appalled to speak. Dumbledore went 
on, “This is due to an event that will be starting in 
October, and continuing throughout the school year, 
taking up much of the teachers’ time and energy — 
but I am sure you will all enjoy it immensely. I have 
great pleasure in announcing that this year at 
Hogwarts — ” 

But at that moment, there was a deafening rumble of 
thunder and the doors of the Great Hall banged open. 

A man stood in the doorway, leaning upon a long 
staff, shrouded in a black traveling cloak. Every head 
in the Great Hall swiveled toward the stranger, 
suddenly brightly illuminated by a fork of lightning 
that flashed across the ceiling. He lowered his hood, 
shook out a long mane of grizzled, dark gray hair, 
then began to walk up toward the teachers’ table. 

A dull clunk echoed through the Hall on his every 
other step. He reached the end of the top table, 
turned right, and limped heavily toward Dumbledore. 
Another flash of lightning crossed the ceiling. 
Hermione gasped. 

The lightning had thrown the man’s face into sharp 
relief, and it was a face unlike any Harry had ever 
seen. It looked as though it had been carved out of 
weathered wood by someone who had only the 
vaguest idea of what human faces are supposed to 
look like, and was none too skilled with a chisel. 
Every inch of skin seemed to be scarred. The mouth 
looked like a diagonal gash, and a large chunk of the 
nose was missing. But it was the man’s eyes that 
made him frightening. 



Page | 204 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




One of them was small, dark, and beady. The other 
was large, round as a coin, and a vivid, electric blue. 
The blue eye was moving ceaselessly, without 
blinking, and was rolling up, down, and from side to 
side, quite independently of the normal eye — and 
then it rolled right over, pointing into the back of the 
man’s head, so that all they could see was whiteness. 

The stranger reached Dumbledore. He stretched out a 
hand that was as badly scarred as his face, and 
Dumbledore shook it, muttering words Harry couldn’t 
hear. He seemed to be making some inquiry of the 
stranger, who shook his head unsmilingly and replied 
in an undertone. Dumbledore nodded and gestured 
the man to the empty seat on his right-hand side. 

The stranger sat down, shook his mane of dark gray 
hair out of his face, pulled a plate of sausages toward 
him, raised it to what was left of his nose, and sniffed 
it. He then took a small knife out of his pocket, 
speared a sausage on the end of it, and began to eat. 
His normal eye was fixed upon the sausages, but the 
blue eye was still darting restlessly around in its 
socket, taking in the Hall and the students. 

“May I introduce our new Defense Against the Dark 
Arts teacher?” said Dumbledore brightly into the 
silence. “Professor Moody.” 

It was usual for new staff members to be greeted with 
applause, but none of the staff or students clapped 
except Dumbledore and Hagrid, who both put their 
hands together and applauded, but the sound echoed 
dismally into the silence, and they stopped fairly 
quickly. Everyone else seemed too transfixed by 
Moody’s bizarre appearance to do more than stare at 
him. 



Page | 205 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Moody?” Harry muttered to Ron. “MacL-Eye Moody? 
The one your dad went to help this morning?” 

“Must be,” said Ron in a low, awed voice. 

“What happened to him?” Hermione whispered. “What 
happened to his face?” 

“Dunno,” Ron whispered back, watching Moody with 
fascination. 

Moody seemed totally indifferent to his less-than- 
warm welcome. Ignoring the jug of pumpkin juice in 
front of him, he reached again into his traveling cloak, 
pulled out a hip flask, and took a long draught from 
it. As he lifted his arm to drink, his cloak was pulled a 
few inches from the ground, and Harry saw, below the 
table, several inches of carved wooden leg, ending in a 
clawed foot. 

Dumbledore cleared his throat. 

“As I was saying,” he said, smiling at the sea of 
students before him, all of whom were still gazing 
transfixed at Mad-Eye Moody, “we are to have the 
honor of hosting a very exciting event over the coming 
months, an event that has not been held for over a 
century. It is my very great pleasure to inform you 
that the Triwizard Tournament will be taking place at 
Hogwarts this year.” 

“You’re JOKING!” said Fred Weasley loudly. 

The tension that had filled the Hall ever since Moody’s 
arrival suddenly broke. Nearly everyone laughed, and 
Dumbledore chuckled appreciatively. 

“I am not joking, Mr. Weasley,” he said, “though now 
that you mention it, I did hear an excellent one over 

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the summer about a troll, a hag, and a leprechaun 
who all go into a bar ...” 

Professor McGonagall cleared her throat loudly. 

“Er — but maybe this is not the time ... no ...” said 
Dumbledore, “where was I? Ah yes, the Triwizard 
Tournament ... well, some of you will not know what 
this tournament involves, so I hope those who do 
know will forgive me for giving a short explanation, 
and allow their attention to wander freely. 

“The Triwizard Tournament was first established 
some seven hundred years ago as a friendly 
competition between the three largest European 
schools of wizardry: Hogwarts, Beauxbatons, and 
Durmstrang. A champion was selected to represent 
each school, and the three champions competed in 
three magical tasks. The schools took it in turns to 
host the tournament once every five years, and it was 
generally agreed to be a most excellent way of 
establishing ties between young witches and wizards 
of different nationalities — until, that is, the death toll 
mounted so high that the tournament was 
discontinued.” 

“ Death toll?” Hermione whispered, looking alarmed. 
But her anxiety did not seem to be shared by the 
majority of students in the Hall; many of them were 
whispering excitedly to one another, and Harry 
himself was far more interested in hearing about the 
tournament than in worrying about deaths that had 
happened hundreds of years ago. 

“There have been several attempts over the centuries 
to reinstate the tournament,” Dumbledore continued, 
“none of which has been very successful. However, 
our own departments of International Magical 
Cooperation and Magical Games and Sports have 
Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




decided the time is ripe for another attempt. We have 
worked hard over the summer to ensure that this 
time, no champion will find himself or herself in 
mortal danger. 

“The heads of Beauxbatons and Durmstrang will be 
arriving with their short-listed contenders in October, 
and the selection of the three champions will take 
place at Halloween. An impartial judge will decide 
which students are most worthy to compete for the 
Triwizard Cup, the glory of their school, and a 
thousand Galleons personal prize money.” 

“I’m going for it!” Fred Weasley hissed down the table, 
his face lit with enthusiasm at the prospect of such 
glory and riches. He was not the only person who 
seemed to be visualizing himself as the Hogwarts 
champion. At every House table, Harry could see 
people either gazing raptly at Dumbledore, or else 
whispering fervently to their neighbors. But then 
Dumbledore spoke again, and the Hall quieted once 
more. 

“Eager though I know all of you will be to bring the 
Triwizard Cup to Hogwarts,” he said, “the heads of the 
participating schools, along with the Ministry of 
Magic, have agreed to impose an age restriction on 
contenders this year. Only students who are of age — 
that is to say, seventeen years or older — will be 
allowed to put forward their names for consideration. 
This” — Dumbledore raised his voice slightly, for 
several people had made noises of outrage at these 
words, and the Weasley twins were suddenly looking 
furious — “is a measure we feel is necessary, given 
that the tournament tasks will still be difficult and 
dangerous, whatever precautions we take, and it is 
highly unlikely that students below sixth and seventh 
year will be able to cope with them. I will personally 
be ensuring that no underage student hoodwinks our 
Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




impartial judge into making them Hogwarts 
champion.” His light blue eyes twinkled as they 
flickered over Fred’s and George’s mutinous faces. “I 
therefore beg you not to waste your time submitting 
yourself if you are under seventeen. 

“The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang 
will be arriving in October and remaining with us for 
the greater part of this year. I know that you will all 
extend every courtesy to our foreign guests while they 
are with us, and will give your whole-hearted support 
to the Hogwarts champion when he or she is selected. 
And now, it is late, and I know how important it is to 
you all to be alert and rested as you enter your 
lessons tomorrow morning. Bedtime! Chop chop!” 

Dumbledore sat down again and turned to talk to 
Mad-Eye Moody. There was a great scraping and 
banging as all the students got to their feet and 
swarmed toward the double doors into the entrance 
hall. 

“They can’t do that!” said George Weasley, who had 
not joined the crowd moving toward the door, but was 
standing up and glaring at Dumbledore. “We’re 
seventeen in April, why can’t we have a shot?” 

“They’re not stopping me entering,” said Fred 
stubbornly, also scowling at the top table. “The 
champions’ll get to do all sorts of stuff you’d never be 
allowed to do normally. And a thousand Galleons 
prize money!” 

“Yeah,” said Ron, a faraway look on his face. “Yeah, a 
thousand Galleons ...” 

“Come on,” said Hermione, “we’ll be the only ones left 
here if you don’t move.” 



Page | 209 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, and George set off for 
the entrance hall, Fred and George debating the ways 
in which Dumbledore might stop those who were 
under seventeen from entering the tournament. 

“Who’s this impartial judge who’s going to decide who 
the champions are?” said Harry. 

“Dunno,” said Fred, “but it’s them we’ll have to fool. I 
reckon a couple of drops of Aging Potion might do it, 
George. ...” 

“Dumbledore knows you’re not of age, though,” said 
Ron. 

“Yeah, but he’s not the one who decides who the 
champion is, is he?” said Fred shrewdly. “Sounds to 
me like once this judge knows who wants to enter, 
he’ll choose the best from each school and never mind 
how old they are. Dumbledore ’s trying to stop us 
giving our names.” 

“People have died, though!” said Hermione in a 
worried voice as they walked through a door 
concealed behind a tapestry and started up another, 
narrower staircase. 

“Yeah,” said Fred airily, “but that was years ago, 
wasn’t it? Anyway, where’s the fun without a bit of 
risk? Hey, Ron, what if we find out how to get ’round 
Dumbledore? Fancy entering?” 

“What d’you reckon?” Ron asked Harry. “Be cool to 
enter, wouldn’t it? But I s’pose they might want 
someone older. ... Dunno if we’ve learned enough. ...” 

“I definitely haven’t,” came Neville’s gloomy voice from 
behind Fred and George. 



Page | 210 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I expect my gran’d want me to try, though. She’s 
always going on about how I should be upholding the 
family honor. I’ll just have to — oops. ...” 

Neville’s foot had sunk right through a step halfway 
up the staircase. There were many of these trick 
stairs at Hogwarts; it was second nature to most of 
the older students to jump this particular step, but 
Neville’s memory was notoriously poor. Harry and 
Ron seized him under the armpits and pulled him 
out, while a suit of armor at the top of the stairs 
creaked and clanked, laughing wheezily. 

“Shut it, you,” said Ron, banging down its visor as 
they passed. 

They made their way up to the entrance to Gryffindor 
Tower, which was concealed behind a large portrait of 
a fat lady in a pink silk dress. 

“Password?” she said as they approached. 

“Balderdash,” said George, “a prefect downstairs told 
me.” 

The portrait swung forward to reveal a hole in the wall 
through which they all climbed. A crackling fire 
warmed the circular common room, which was full of 
squashy armchairs and tables. Hermione cast the 
merrily dancing flames a dark look, and Harry 
distinctly heard her mutter “ Slave labor,” before 
bidding them good night and disappearing through 
the doorway to the girls’ dormitory. 

Harry, Ron, and Neville climbed up the last, spiral 
staircase until they reached their own dormitory, 
which was situated at the top of the tower. Five four- 
poster beds with deep crimson hangings stood against 
the walls, each with its owner’s trunk at the foot. 

Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




Dean and Seamus were already getting into bed; 
Seamus had pinned his Ireland rosette to his 
headboard, and Dean had tacked up a poster of 
Viktor Krum over his bedside table. His old poster of 
the West Ham football team was pinned right next to 
it. 

“Mental,” Ron sighed, shaking his head at the 
completely stationary soccer players. 

Harry, Ron, and Neville got into their pajamas and 
into bed. Someone — a house-elf, no doubt — had 
placed warming pans between the sheets. It was 
extremely comfortable, lying there in bed and 
listening to the storm raging outside. 

“I might go in for it, you know,” Ron said sleepily 
through the darkness, “if Fred and George find out 
how to ... the tournament ... you never know, do 
you?” 

“S’pose not. ...” 

Harry rolled over in bed, a series of dazzling new 
pictures forming in his mind’s eye. ... He had 
hoodwinked the impartial judge into believing he was 
seventeen ... he had become Hogwarts champion ... 
he was standing on the grounds, his arms raised in 
triumph in front of the whole school, all of whom were 
applauding and screaming ... he had just won the 
Triwizard Tournament. ... Cho’s face stood out 
particularly clearly in the blurred crowd, her face 
glowing with admiration. ... 

Harry grinned into his pillow, exceptionally glad that 
Ron couldn’t see what he could. 



Page | 212 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






MAD-EYE MOODY 

The storm had blown itself out by the following 
morning, though the ceiling in the Great Hall was still 
gloomy; heavy clouds of pewter gray swirled overhead 
as Harry, Ron, and Hermione examined their new 
course schedules at breakfast. A few seats along, 

Fred, George, and Lee Jordan were discussing 
magical methods of aging themselves and bluffing 
their way into the Triwizard Tournament. 

“Today’s not bad ... outside all morning,” said Ron, 
who was running his finger down the Monday column 
of his schedule. “Herbology with the Hufflepuffs and 
Care of Magical Creatures ... damn it, we’re still with 
the Slytherins. ...” 

“Double Divination this afternoon,” Harry groaned, 
looking down. Divination was his least favorite 
subject, apart from Potions. Professor Trelawney kept 
predicting Harry’s death, which he found extremely 
annoying. 



Page | 213 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“You should have given it up like me, shouldn’t you?” 
said Hermione briskly, buttering herself some toast. 
“Then you’d be doing something sensible like 
Arithmancy.” 

“You’re eating again, I notice,” said Ron, watching 
Hermione adding liberal amounts of jam to her toast 
too. 

“I’ve decided there are better ways of making a stand 
about elf rights,” said Hermione haughtily. 

“Yeah ... and you were hungry,” said Ron, grinning. 

There was a sudden rustling noise above them, and a 
hundred owls came soaring through the open 
windows carrying the morning mail. Instinctively, 
Harry looked up, but there was no sign of white 
among the mass of brown and gray. The owls circled 
the tables, looking for the people to whom their letters 
and packages were addressed. A large tawny owl 
soared down to Neville Longbottom and deposited a 
parcel into his lap — Neville almost always forgot to 
pack something. On the other side of the Hall Draco 
Malfoy’s eagle owl had landed on his shoulder, 
carrying what looked like his usual supply of sweets 
and cakes from home. Trying to ignore the sinking 
feeling of disappointment in his stomach, Harry 
returned to his porridge. Was it possible that 
something had happened to Hedwig, and that Sirius 
hadn’t even got his letter? 

His preoccupation lasted all the way across the 
sodden vegetable patch until they arrived in 
greenhouse three, but here he was distracted by 
Professor Sprout showing the class the ugliest plants 
Harry had ever seen. Indeed, they looked less like 
plants than thick, black, giant slugs, protruding 
vertically out of the soil. Each was squirming slightly 
Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and had a number of large, shiny swellings upon it, 
which appeared to be full of liquid. 

“Bubotubers,” Professor Sprout told them briskly. 
“They need squeezing. You will collect the pus — ” 

“The what?” said Seamus Finnigan, sounding 
revolted. 

“Pus, Finnigan, pus,” said Professor Sprout, “and it’s 
extremely valuable, so don’t waste it. You will collect 
the pus, I say, in these bottles. Wear your dragon- 
hide gloves; it can do funny things to the skin when 
undiluted, bubotuber pus.” 

Squeezing the bubotubers was disgusting, but oddly 
satisfying. As each swelling was popped, a large 
amount of thick yellowish-green liquid burst forth, 
which smelled strongly of petrol. They caught it in the 
bottles as Professor Sprout had indicated, and by the 
end of the lesson had collected several pints. 

“This’ll keep Madam Pomfrey happy,” said Professor 
Sprout, stoppering the last bottle with a cork. “An 
excellent remedy for the more stubborn forms of acne, 
bubotuber pus. Should stop students resorting to 
desperate measures to rid themselves of pimples.” 

“Like poor Eloise Midgen,” said Hannah Abbott, a 
Hufflepuff, in a hushed voice. “She tried to curse hers 
off.” 

“Silly girl,” said Professor Sprout, shaking her head. 
“But Madam Pomfrey fixed her nose back on in the 
end.” 

A booming bell echoed from the castle across the wet 
grounds, signaling the end of the lesson, and the 
class separated; the Hufflepuffs climbing the stone 

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




steps for Transfiguration, and the Gryffindors heading 
in the other direction, down the sloping lawn toward 
Hagrid ’s small wooden cabin, which stood on the edge 
of the Forbidden Forest. 

Hagrid was standing outside his hut, one hand on the 
collar of his enormous black boarhound, Fang. There 
were several open wooden crates on the ground at his 
feet, and Fang was whimpering and straining at his 
collar, apparently keen to investigate the contents 
more closely. As they drew nearer, an odd rattling 
noise reached their ears, punctuated by what 
sounded like minor explosions. 

“Mornin’!” Hagrid said, grinning at Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione. “Be’er wait fer the Slytherins, they won’ 
want ter miss this — Blast-Ended Skrewts!” 

“Come again?” said Ron. 

Hagrid pointed down into the crates. 

“Eurgh!” squealed Lavender Brown, jumping 
backward. 

“Eurgh” just about summed up the Blast-Ended 
Skrewts in Harry’s opinion. They looked like 
deformed, shell-less lobsters, horribly pale and slimy - 
looking, with legs sticking out in very odd places and 
no visible heads. There were about a hundred of them 
in each crate, each about six inches long, crawling 
over one another, bumping blindly into the sides of 
the boxes. They were giving off a very powerful smell 
of rotting fish. Every now and then, sparks would fly 
out of the end of a skrewt, and with a small phut, it 
would be propelled forward several inches. 



Page | 216 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“On’y jus’ hatched,” said Hagrid proudly, “so yeh’ll be 
able ter raise ’em yerselves! Thought we’d make a bit 
of a project of it!” 

“And why would we want to raise them?” said a cold 
voice. 

The Slytherins had arrived. The speaker was Draco 
Malfoy. Crabbe and Goyle were chuckling 
appreciatively at his words. 

Hagrid looked stumped at the question. 

“I mean, what do they do?” asked Malfoy. “What is the 
point of them?” 

Hagrid opened his mouth, apparently thinking hard; 
there was a few seconds’ pause, then he said roughly, 
“Tha’s next lesson, Malfoy. Yer jus’ feedin’ ’em today. 
Now, yeh’ll wan’ ter try ’em on a few diff’rent things — 
I’ve never had ’em before, not sure what they’ll go fer 

— I got ant eggs an’ frog livers an’ a bit o’ grass snake 

— just try ’em out with a bit of each.” 

“First pus and now this,” muttered Seamus. 

Nothing but deep affection for Hagrid could have 
made Harry, Ron, and Hermione pick up squelchy 
handfuls of frog liver and lower them into the crates 
to tempt the Blast-Ended Skrewts. Harry couldn’t 
suppress the suspicion that the whole thing was 
entirely pointless, because the skrewts didn’t seem to 
have mouths. 

“Ouch\” yelled Dean Thomas after about ten minutes. 
“It got me!” 

Hagrid hurried over to him, looking anxious. 



Page | 217 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Its end exploded!” said Dean angrily, showing Hagrid 
a burn on his hand. 

“Ah, yeah, that can happen when they blast off,” said 
Hagrid, nodding. 

“Eurgh!” said Lavender Brown again. “Eurgh, Hagrid, 
what’s that pointy thing on it?” 

“Ah, some of ’em have got stings,” said Hagrid 
enthusiastically (Lavender quickly withdrew her hand 
from the box). “I reckon they’re the males. ... The 
females Ve got sorta sucker things on their bellies. ... I 
think they might be ter suck blood.” 

“Well, I can certainly see why we’re trying to keep 
them alive,” said Malfoy sarcastically. “Who wouldn’t 
want pets that can burn, sting, and bite all at once?” 

“Just because they’re not very pretty, it doesn’t mean 
they’re not useful,” Hermione snapped. “Dragon 
blood’s amazingly magical, but you wouldn’t want a 
dragon for a pet, would you?” 

Harry and Ron grinned at Hagrid, who gave them a 
furtive smile from behind his bushy beard. Hagrid 
would have liked nothing better than a pet dragon, as 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione knew only too well — he 
had owned one for a brief period during their first 
year, a vicious Norwegian Ridgeback by the name of 
Norbert. Hagrid simply loved monstrous creatures, 
the more lethal, the better. 

“Well, at least the skrewts are small,” said Ron as 
they made their way back up to the castle for lunch 
an hour later. 



Page | 218 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They are now,” said Hermione in an exasperated 
voice, “but once Hagrid’s found out what they eat, I 
expect they’ll be six feet long.” 

“Well, that won’t matter if they turn out to cure 
seasickness or something, will it?” said Ron, grinning 
slyly at her. 

“You know perfectly well I only said that to shut 
Malfoy up,” said Hermione. “As a matter of fact I 
think he’s right. The best thing to do would be to 
stamp on the lot of them before they start attacking 
us all.” 

They sat down at the Gryffindor table and helped 
themselves to lamb chops and potatoes. Hermione 
began to eat so fast that Harry and Ron stared at her. 

“Er — is this the new stand on elf rights?” said Ron. 
“You’re going to make yourself puke instead?” 

“No,” said Hermione, with as much dignity as she 
could muster with her mouth bulging with sprouts. “I 
just want to get to the library.” 

“What?” said Ron in disbelief. “Hermione — it’s the 
first day back! We haven’t even got homework yet!” 

Hermione shrugged and continued to shovel down her 
food as though she had not eaten for days. Then she 
leapt to her feet, said, “See you at dinner!” and 
departed at high speed. 

When the bell rang to signal the start of afternoon 
lessons, Harry and Ron set off for North Tower where, 
at the top of a tightly spiraling staircase, a silver 
stepladder led to a circular trapdoor in the ceiling, 
and the room where Professor Trelawney lived. 



Page | 219 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The familiar sweet perfume spreading from the fire 
met their nostrils as they emerged at the top of the 
stepladder. As ever, the curtains were all closed; the 
circular room was bathed in a dim reddish light cast 
by the many lamps, which were all draped with 
scarves and shawls. Harry and Ron walked through 
the mass of occupied chintz chairs and poufs that 
cluttered the room, and sat down at the same small 
circular table. 

“Good day,” said the misty voice of Professor 
Trelawney right behind Harry, making him jump. 

A very thin woman with enormous glasses that made 
her eyes appear far too large for her face, Professor 
Trelawney was peering down at Harry with the tragic 
expression she always wore whenever she saw him. 
The usual large amount of beads, chains, and bangles 
glittered upon her person in the firelight. 

“You are preoccupied, my dear,” she said mournfully 
to Harry. “My inner eye sees past your brave face to 
the troubled soul within. And I regret to say that your 
worries are not baseless. I see difficult times ahead 
for you, alas ... most difficult ... I fear the thing you 
dread will indeed come to pass ... and perhaps sooner 
than you think. ...” 

Her voice dropped almost to a whisper. Ron rolled his 
eyes at Harry, who looked stonily back. Professor 
Trelawney swept past them and seated herself in a 
large winged armchair before the fire, facing the class. 
Lavender Brown and Parvati Patil, who deeply 
admired Professor Trelawney, were sitting on poufs 
very close to her. 

“My dears, it is time for us to consider the stars,” she 
said. “The movements of the planets and the 
mysterious portents they reveal only to those who 

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




understand the steps of the celestial dance. Human 
destiny may be deciphered by the planetary rays, 
which intermingle ...” 

But Harry’s thoughts had drifted. The perfumed fire 
always made him feel sleepy and dull-witted, and 
Professor Trelawney’s rambling talks on fortune- 
telling never held him exactly spellbound — though 
he couldn’t help thinking about what she had just 
said to him. “ ‘I fear the thing you dread will indeed 
come to pass . . . ’ ” 

But Hermione was right, Harry thought irritably, 
Professor Trelawney really was an old fraud. He 
wasn’t dreading anything at the moment at all ... well, 
unless you counted his fears that Sirius had been 
caught ... but what did Professor Trelawney know? He 
had long since come to the conclusion that her brand 
of fortune-telling was really no more than lucky 
guesswork and a spooky manner. 

Except, of course, for that time at the end of last 
term, when she had made the prediction about 
Voldemort rising again . . . and Dumbledore himself 
had said that he thought that trance had been 
genuine, when Harry had described it to him. ... 

“Harry\” Ron muttered. 

“What?” 

Harry looked around; the whole class was staring at 
him. He sat up straight; he had been almost dozing 
off, lost in the heat and his thoughts. 

“I was saying, my dear, that you were clearly born 
under the baleful influence of Saturn,” said Professor 
Trelawney, a faint note of resentment in her voice at 



Page | 221 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the fact that he had obviously not been hanging on 
her words. 

“Born under — what, sorry?” said Harry. 

“Saturn, dear, the planet Saturn!” said Professor 
Trelawney, sounding definitely irritated that he wasn’t 
riveted by this news. “I was saying that Saturn was 
surely in a position of power in the heavens at the 
moment of your birth. ... Your dark hair ... your mean 
stature ... tragic losses so young in life ... I think I am 
right in saying, my dear, that you were born in 
midwinter?” 

“No,” said Harry, “I was born in July.” 

Ron hastily turned his laugh into a hacking cough. 

Half an hour later, each of them had been given a 
complicated circular chart, and was attempting to fill 
in the position of the planets at their moment of birth. 
It was dull work, requiring much consultation of 
timetables and calculation of angles. 

“I’ve got two Neptunes here,” said Harry after a while, 
frowning down at his piece of parchment, “that can’t 
be right, can it?” 

“Aaaaah,” said Ron, imitating Professor Trelawney’s 
mystical whisper, “when two Neptunes appear in the 
sky, it is a sure sign that a midget in glasses is being 
born, Harry ...” 

Seamus and Dean, who were working nearby, 
sniggered loudly, though not loudly enough to mask 
the excited squeals from Lavender Brown — “Oh 
Professor, look! I think I’ve got an unaspected planet! 
Oooh, which one’s that, Professor?” 



Page | 222 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It is Uranus, my dear,” said Professor Trelawney, 
peering down at the chart. 

“Can I have a look at Uranus too, Lavender?” said 
Ron. 

Most unfortunately, Professor Trelawney heard him, 
and it was this, perhaps, that made her give them so 
much homework at the end of the class. 

“A detailed analysis of the way the planetary 
movements in the coming month will affect you, with 
reference to your personal chart,” she snapped, 
sounding much more like Professor McGonagall than 
her usual airy-fairy self. “I want it ready to hand in 
next Monday, and no excuses!” 

“Miserable old bat,” said Ron bitterly as they joined 
the crowds descending the staircases back to the 
Great Hall and dinner. “Thatll take all weekend, that 
will. ...” 

“Lots of homework?” said Hermione brightly, catching 
up with them. “Professor Vector didn’t give us any at 
all!” 

“Well, bully for Professor Vector,” said Ron moodily. 

They reached the entrance hall, which was packed 
with people queuing for dinner. They had just joined 
the end of the line, when a loud voice rang out behind 
them. 

“Weasley! Hey, Weasley!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned. Malfoy, Crabbe, 
and Goyle were standing there, each looking 
thoroughly pleased about something. 



Page | 223 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” said Ron shortly. 



“Your dad’s in the paper, Weasley!” said Malfoy, 
brandishing a copy of the Daily Prophet and speaking 
very loudly, so that everyone in the packed entrance 
hall could hear. “Listen to this! 

FURTHER MISTAKES AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC 

It seems as though the Ministry of Magic’s troubles are 
not yet at an end, writes Rita Skeeter, Special 
Correspondent. Recently under fire for its poor crowd 
control at the Quidditch World Cup, and still unable to 
account for the disappearance of one of its witches, the 
Ministry was plunged into fresh embarrassment 
yesterday by the antics of Arnold Weasley, of the 
Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office. ” 

Malfoy looked up. 

“Imagine them not even getting his name right, 
Weasley. It’s almost as though he’s a complete 
nonentity, isn’t it?” he crowed. 

Everyone in the entrance hall was listening now. 
Malfoy straightened the paper with a flourish and 
read on: 

Arnold Weasley, who was charged with possession of 
a flying car two years ago, was yesterday involved in 
a tussle with several Muggle law-keepers (“policemen”) 
over a number of highly aggressive dustbins. Mr. 
Weasley appears to have rushed to the aid of “Mad- 
Eye” Moody, the aged ex-Auror who retired from the 
Ministry when no longer able to tell the difference 
between a handshake and attempted murder. 
Unsurprisingly, Mr. Weasley found, upon arrival at Mr. 
Moody ’s heavily guarded house, that Mr. Moody had 
once again raised a false alarm. Mr. Weasley was 
Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




forced to modify several memories before he could 
escape from the policemen, but refused to answer 
Daily Prophet questions about why he had involved 
the Ministry in such an undignified and potentially 
embarrassing scene. 

“And there’s a picture, Weasley!” said Malfoy, flipping 
the paper over and holding it up. “A picture of your 
parents outside their house — if you can call it a 
house! Your mother could do with losing a bit of 
weight, couldn’t she?” 

Ron was shaking with fury. Everyone was staring at 
him. 

“Get stuffed, Malfoy,” said Harry. “C’mon, Ron. ...” 

“Oh yeah, you were staying with them this summer, 
weren’t you, Potter?” sneered Malfoy. “So tell me, is 
his mother really that porky, or is it just the picture?” 

“You know your mother, Malfoy?” said Harry — both 
he and Hermione had grabbed the back of Ron’s 
robes to stop him from launching himself at Malfoy — 
“that expression she’s got, like she’s got dung under 
her nose? Has she always looked like that, or was it 
just because you were with her?” 

Malfoy’s pale face went slightly pink. 

“Don’t you dare insult my mother, Potter.” 

“Keep your fat mouth shut, then,” said Harry, turning 
away. 

BANG! 

Several people screamed — Harry felt something 
white-hot graze the side of his face — he plunged his 

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




hand into his robes for his wand, but before he’d even 
touched it, he heard a second loud BANG, and a roar 
that echoed through the entrance hall. 

“OH NO YOU DONT, LADDIE!” 

Harry spun around. Professor Moody was limping 
down the marble staircase. His wand was out and it 
was pointing right at a pure white ferret, which was 
shivering on the stone-flagged floor, exactly where 
Malfoy had been standing. 

There was a terrified silence in the entrance hall. 
Nobody but Moody was moving a muscle. Moody 
turned to look at Harry — at least, his normal eye was 
looking at Harry; the other one was pointing into the 
back of his head. 

“Did he get you?” Moody growled. His voice was low 
and gravelly. 

“No,” said Harry, “missed.” 

“LEAVE IT!” Moody shouted. 

“Leave — what?” Harry said, bewildered. 

“Not you — him!” Moody growled, jerking his thumb 
over his shoulder at Crabbe, who had just frozen, 
about to pick up the white ferret. It seemed that 
Moody’s rolling eye was magical and could see out of 
the back of his head. 

Moody started to limp toward Crabbe, Goyle, and the 
ferret, which gave a terrified squeak and took off, 
streaking toward the dungeons. 

“I don’t think so!” roared Moody, pointing his wand at 
the ferret again — it flew ten feet into the air, fell with 

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




a smack to the floor, and then bounced upward once 
more. 

“I don’t like people who attack when their opponent’s 
back’s turned,” growled Moody as the ferret bounced 
higher and higher, squealing in pain. “Stinking, 
cowardly, scummy thing to do. ...” 

The ferret flew through the air, its legs and tail flailing 
helplessly. 

“Never — do — that — again — ” said Moody, speaking 
each word as the ferret hit the stone floor and 
bounced upward again. 

“Professor Moody!” said a shocked voice. 

Professor McGonagall was coming down the marble 
staircase with her arms full of books. 

“Hello, Professor McGonagall,” said Moody calmly, 
bouncing the ferret still higher. 

“What — what are you doing?” said Professor 
McGonagall, her eyes following the bouncing ferret’s 
progress through the air. 

“Teaching,” said Moody. 

“Teach — Moody, is that a student?” shrieked 
Professor McGonagall, the books spilling out of her 
arms. 

“Yep,” said Moody. 

“No!” cried Professor McGonagall, running down the 
stairs and pulling out her wand; a moment later, with 
a loud snapping noise, Draco Malfoy had reappeared, 
lying in a heap on the floor with his sleek blond hair 

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




all over his now brilliantly pink face. He got to his 
feet, wincing. 

“Moody, we never use Transfiguration as a 
punishment!” said Professor McGonagall weakly. 
“Surely Professor Dumbledore told you that?” 

“He might’ve mentioned it, yeah,” said Moody, 
scratching his chin unconcernedly, “but I thought a 
good sharp shock — ” 

“We give detentions, Moody! Or speak to the offender’s 
Head of House!” 

“I’ll do that, then,” said Moody, staring at Malfoy with 
great dislike. 

Malfoy, whose pale eyes were still watering with pain 
and humiliation, looked malevolently up at Moody 
and muttered something in which the words “my 
father” were distinguishable. 

“Oh yeah?” said Moody quietly, limping forward a few 
steps, the dull clunk of his wooden leg echoing around 
the hall. “Well, I know your father of old, boy. ... You 
tell him Moody’s keeping a close eye on his son . . . you 
tell him that from me. ... Now, your Head of House’ll 
be Snape, will it?” 

“Yes,” said Malfoy resentfully. 

“Another old friend,” growled Moody. “I’ve been 
looking forward to a chat with old Snape. ... Come on, 
you. ...” 

And he seized Malfoy’s upper arm and marched him 
off toward the dungeons. 



Page | 228 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Professor McGonagall stared anxiously after them for 
a few moments, then waved her wand at her fallen 
books, causing them to soar up into the air and back 
into her arms. 

“Don’t talk to me,” Ron said quietly to Harry and 
Hermione as they sat down at the Gryffindor table a 
few minutes later, surrounded by excited talk on all 
sides about what had just happened. 

“Why not?” said Hermione in surprise. 

“Because I want to fix that in my memory forever,” 
said Ron, his eyes closed and an uplifted expression 
on his face. “Draco Malfoy, the amazing bouncing 
ferret ...” 

Harry and Hermione both laughed, and Hermione 
began doling beef casserole onto each of their plates. 

“He could have really hurt Malfoy, though,” she said. 
“It was good, really, that Professor McGonagall 
stopped it — ” 

“Hermione!” said Ron furiously, his eyes snapping 
open again, “you’re ruining the best moment of my 
life!” 

Hermione made an impatient noise and began to eat 
at top speed again. 

“Don’t tell me you’re going back to the library this 
evening?” said Harry, watching her. 

“Got to,” said Hermione thickly. “Loads to do.” 

“But you told us Professor Vector — ” 



Page | 229 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s not schoolwork,” she said. Within five minutes, 
she had cleared her plate and departed. No sooner 
had she gone than her seat was taken by Fred 
Weasley. 

“Moody!” he said. “How cool is he?” 

“Beyond cool,” said George, sitting down opposite 
Fred. 

“Supercool,” said the twins’ best friend, Lee Jordan, 
sliding into the seat beside George. “We had him this 
afternoon,” he told Harry and Ron. 

“What was it like?” said Harry eagerly. 

Fred, George, and Lee exchanged looks full of 
meaning. 

“Never had a lesson like it,” said Fred. 

“He knows, man,” said Lee. 

“Knows what?” said Ron, leaning forward. 

“Knows what it’s like to be out there doing it,” said 
George impressively. 

“Doing what?” said Harry. 

“Fighting the Dark Arts,” said Fred. 

“He’s seen it all,” said George. 

“ ’Mazing,” said Lee. 

Ron dived into his bag for his schedule. 



Page | 230 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“We haven’t got him till Thursday!” he said in a 
disappointed voice. 



Page | 231 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE UNFORGIVABLE CURSES 

The next two days passed without great incident, 
unless you counted Neville melting his sixth cauldron 
in Potions. Professor Snape, who seemed to have 
attained new levels of vindictiveness over the 
summer, gave Neville detention, and Neville returned 
from it in a state of nervous collapse, having been 
made to disembowel a barrel full of horned toads. 

“You know why Snape ’s in such a foul mood, don’t 
you?” said Ron to Harry as they watched Hermione 
teaching Neville a Scouring Charm to remove the frog 
guts from under his fingernails. 

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Moody.” 

It was common knowledge that Snape really wanted 
the Dark Arts job, and he had now failed to get it for 
the fourth year running. Snape had disliked all of 
their previous Dark Arts teachers, and shown it — 
but he seemed strangely wary of displaying overt 
animosity to Mad-Eye Moody. Indeed, whenever Harry 
saw the two of them together — at mealtimes, or 

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



when they passed in the corridors — he had the 
distinct impression that Snape was avoiding Moody’s 
eye, whether magical or normal. 

“I reckon Snape’s a bit scared of him, you know,” 
Harry said thoughtfully. 

“Imagine if Moody turned Snape into a horned toad,” 
said Ron, his eyes misting over, “and bounced him all 
around his dungeon. ...” 

The Gryffindor fourth years were looking forward to 
Moody’s first lesson so much that they arrived early 
on Thursday lunchtime and queued up outside his 
classroom before the bell had even rung. The only 
person missing was Hermione, who turned up just in 
time for the lesson. 

“Been in the — ” 

“Library.” Harry finished her sentence for her. 

“C’mon, quick, or we won’t get decent seats.” 

They hurried into three chairs right in front of the 
teacher’s desk, took out their copies of The Dark 
Forces: A Guide to Self-Protection, and waited, 
unusually quiet. Soon they heard Moody’s distinctive 
clunking footsteps coming down the corridor, and he 
entered the room, looking as strange and frightening 
as ever. They could just see his clawed, wooden foot 
protruding from underneath his robes. 

“You can put those away,” he growled, stumping over 
to his desk and sitting down, “those books. You won’t 
need them.” 

They returned the books to their bags, Ron looking 
excited. 



Page | 233 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody took out a register, shook his long mane of 
grizzled gray hair out of his twisted and scarred face, 
and began to call out names, his normal eye moving 
steadily down the list while his magical eye swiveled 
around, fixing upon each student as he or she 
answered. 

“Right then,” he said, when the last person had 
declared themselves present, “I’ve had a letter from 
Professor Lupin about this class. Seems you’ve had a 
pretty thorough grounding in tackling Dark creatures 
— you’ve covered boggarts, Red Caps, hinkypunks, 
grindylows, Kappas, and werewolves, is that right?” 

There was a general murmur of assent. 

“But you’re behind — very behind — on dealing with 
curses,” said Moody. “So I’m here to bring you up to 
scratch on what wizards can do to each other. I’ve got 
one year to teach you how to deal with Dark — ” 

“What, aren’t you staying?” Ron blurted out. 

Moody’s magical eye spun around to stare at Ron; 

Ron looked extremely apprehensive, but after a 
moment Moody smiled — the first time Harry had 
seen him do so. The effect was to make his heavily 
scarred face look more twisted and contorted than 
ever, but it was nevertheless good to know that he 
ever did anything as friendly as smile. Ron looked 
deeply relieved. 

“You’ll be Arthur Weasley’s son, eh?” Moody said. 
“Your father got me out of a very tight corner a few 
days ago. ... Yeah, I’m staying just the one year. 
Special favor to Dumbledore. ... One year, and then 
back to my quiet retirement.” 



Page | 234 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He gave a harsh laugh, and then clapped his gnarled 
hands together. 

“So — straight into it. Curses. They come in many 
strengths and forms. Now, according to the Ministry 
of Magic, I’m supposed to teach you countercurses 
and leave it at that. I’m not supposed to show you 
what illegal Dark curses look like until you’re in the 
sixth year. You’re not supposed to be old enough to 
deal with it till then. But Professor Dumbledore’s got 
a higher opinion of your nerves, he reckons you can 
cope, and I say, the sooner you know what you’re up 
against, the better. How are you supposed to defend 
yourself against something you’ve never seen? A 
wizard who’s about to put an illegal curse on you isn’t 
going to tell you what he’s about to do. He’s not going 
to do it nice and polite to your face. You need to be 
prepared. You need to be alert and watchful. You 
need to put that away, Miss Brown, when I’m 
talking.” 

Lavender jumped and blushed. She had been showing 
Parvati her completed horoscope under the desk. 
Apparently Moody’s magical eye could see through 
solid wood, as well as out of the back of his head. 

“So ... do any of you know which curses are most 
heavily punished by wizarding law?” 

Several hands rose tentatively into the air, including 
Ron’s and Hermione’s. Moody pointed at Ron, though 
his magical eye was still fixed on Lavender. 

“Er,” said Ron tentatively, “my dad told me about one. 
... Is it called the Imperius Curse, or something?” 

“Ah, yes,” said Moody appreciatively. “Your father 
would know that one. Gave the Ministry a lot of 
trouble at one time, the Imperius Curse.” 

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody got heavily to his mismatched feet, opened his 
desk drawer, and took out a glass jar. Three large 
black spiders were scuttling around inside it. Harry 
felt Ron recoil slightly next to him — Ron hated 
spiders. 

Moody reached into the jar, caught one of the spiders, 
and held it in the palm of his hand so that they could 
all see it. He then pointed his wand at it and 
muttered, “Imperio\” 

The spider leapt from Moody’s hand on a fine thread 
of silk and began to swing backward and forward as 
though on a trapeze. It stretched out its legs rigidly, 
then did a back flip, breaking the thread and landing 
on the desk, where it began to cartwheel in circles. 
Moody jerked his wand, and the spider rose onto two 
of its hind legs and went into what was unmistakably 
a tap dance. 

Everyone was laughing — everyone except Moody. 

“Think it’s funny, do you?” he growled. “You’d like it, 
would you, if I did it to you?” 

The laughter died away almost instantly. 

“Total control,” said Moody quietly as the spider 
balled itself up and began to roll over and over. “I 
could make it jump out of the window, drown itself, 
throw itself down one of your throats ...” 

Ron gave an involuntary shudder. 

“Years back, there were a lot of witches and wizards 
being controlled by the Imperius Curse,” said Moody, 
and Harry knew he was talking about the days in 
which Voldemort had been all-powerful. “Some job for 



Page | 236 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the Ministry, trying to sort out who was being forced 
to act, and who was acting of their own free will. 

“The Imperius Curse can be fought, and I’ll be 
teaching you how, but it takes real strength of 
character, and not everyone’s got it. Better avoid 
being hit with it if you can. CONSTANT VIGILANCE!” 
he barked, and everyone jumped. 

Moody picked up the somersaulting spider and threw 
it back into the jar. 

“Anyone else know one? Another illegal curse?” 

Hermione’s hand flew into the air again and so, to 
Harry’s slight surprise, did Neville’s. The only class in 
which Neville usually volunteered information was 
Herbology, which was easily his best subject. Neville 
looked surprised at his own daring. 

“Yes?” said Moody, his magical eye rolling right over 
to fix on Neville. 

“There’s one — the Cruciatus Curse,” said Neville in a 
small but distinct voice. 

Moody was looking very intently at Neville, this time 
with both eyes. 

“Your name’s Longbottom?” he said, his magical eye 
swooping down to check the register again. 

Neville nodded nervously, but Moody made no further 
inquiries. Turning back to the class at large, he 
reached into the jar for the next spider and placed it 
upon the desktop, where it remained motionless, 
apparently too scared to move. 



Page | 237 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“The Cruciatus Curse,” said Moody. “Needs to be a bit 
bigger for you to get the idea,” he said, pointing his 
wand at the spider. “Engorgio\” 

The spider swelled. It was now larger than a 
tarantula. Abandoning all pretense, Ron pushed his 
chair backward, as far away from Moody’s desk as 
possible. 

Moody raised his wand again, pointed it at the spider, 
and muttered, “CrucioV’ 

At once, the spider’s legs bent in upon its body; it 
rolled over and began to twitch horribly, rocking from 
side to side. No sound came from it, but Harry was 
sure that if it could have given voice, it would have 
been screaming. Moody did not remove his wand, and 
the spider started to shudder and jerk more violently 



“Stop it!” Hermione said shrilly. 

Harry looked around at her. She was looking, not at 
the spider, but at Neville, and Harry, following her 
gaze, saw that Neville’s hands were clenched upon the 
desk in front of him, his knuckles white, his eyes 
wide and horrified. 

Moody raised his wand. The spider’s legs relaxed, but 
it continued to twitch. 

“Reducio,” Moody muttered, and the spider shrank 
back to its proper size. He put it back into the jar. 

“Pain,” said Moody softly. “You don’t need 
thumbscrews or knives to torture someone if you can 
perform the Cruciatus Curse. ... That one was very 
popular once too. 



Page | 238 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Right . . . anyone know any others?” 



Harry looked around. From the looks on everyone’s 
faces, he guessed they were all wondering what was 
going to happen to the last spider. Hermione’s hand 
shook slightly as, for the third time, she raised it into 
the air. 

“Yes?” said Moody, looking at her. 

“Avada Kedavra,” Hermione whispered. 

Several people looked uneasily around at her, 
including Ron. 

“Ah,” said Moody, another slight smile twisting his 
lopsided mouth. “Yes, the last and worst. Avada 
Kedavra ... the Killing Curse.” 

He put his hand into the glass jar, and almost as 
though it knew what was coming, the third spider 
scuttled frantically around the bottom of the jar, 
trying to evade Moody’s fingers, but he trapped it, and 
placed it upon the desktop. It started to scuttle 
frantically across the wooden surface. 

Moody raised his wand, and Harry felt a sudden thrill 
of foreboding. 

“Avada Kedavral” Moody roared. 

There was a flash of blinding green light and a 
rushing sound, as though a vast, invisible something 
was soaring through the air — instantaneously the 
spider rolled over onto its back, unmarked, but 
unmistakably dead. Several of the students stifled 
cries; Ron had thrown himself backward and almost 
toppled off his seat as the spider skidded toward him. 

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody swept the dead spider off the desk onto the 
floor. 

“Not nice,” he said calmly. “Not pleasant. And there’s 
no countercurse. There’s no blocking it. Only one 
known person has ever survived it, and he’s sitting 
right in front of me.” 

Harry felt his face redden as Moody’s eyes (both of 
them) looked into his own. He could feel everyone else 
looking around at him too. Harry stared at the blank 
blackboard as though fascinated by it, but not really 
seeing it at all. ... 

So that was how his parents had died . . . exactly like 
that spider. Had they been unblemished and 
unmarked too? Had they simply seen the flash of 
green light and heard the rush of speeding death, 
before life was wiped from their bodies? 

Harry had been picturing his parents’ deaths over 
and over again for three years now, ever since he’d 
found out they had been murdered, ever since he’d 
found out what had happened that night: Wormtail 
had betrayed his parents’ whereabouts to Voldemort, 
who had come to find them at their cottage. How 
Voldemort had killed Harry’s father first. How James 
Potter had tried to hold him off, while he shouted at 
his wife to take Harry and run ... Voldemort had 
advanced on Lily Potter, told her to move aside so 
that he could kill Harry . . . how she had begged him to 
kill her instead, refused to stop shielding her son . . . 
and so Voldemort had murdered her too, before 
turning his wand on Harry. . . . 

Harry knew these details because he had heard his 
parents’ voices when he had fought the dementors 
last year — for that was the terrible power of the 
dementors: to force their victims to relive the worst 

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




memories of their lives, and drown, powerless, in their 
own despair. . . . 

Moody was speaking again, from a great distance, it 
seemed to Harry. With a massive effort, he pulled 
himself back to the present and listened to what 
Moody was saying. 

“Avada Kedavra’s a curse that needs a powerful bit of 
magic behind it — you could all get your wands out 
now and point them at me and say the words, and I 
doubt I’d get so much as a nosebleed. But that 
doesn’t matter. I’m not here to teach you how to do it. 

“Now, if there’s no countercurse, why am I showing 
you? Because you’ve got to know. You’ve got to 
appreciate what the worst is. You don’t want to find 
yourself in a situation where you’re facing it. 
CONSTANT VIGILANCE!” he roared, and the whole 
class jumped again. 

“Now ... those three curses — Avada Kedavra, 
Imperius, and Cruciatus — are known as the 
Unforgivable Curses. The use of any one of them on a 
fellow human being is enough to earn a life sentence 
in Azkaban. That’s what you’re up against. That’s 
what I’ve got to teach you to fight. You need 
preparing. You need arming. But most of all, you 
need to practice constant, never-ceasing vigilance. Get 
out your quills ... copy this down. ...” 

They spent the rest of the lesson taking notes on each 
of the Unforgivable Curses. No one spoke until the 
bell rang — but when Moody had dismissed them and 
they had left the classroom, a torrent of talk burst 
forth. Most people were discussing the curses in awed 
voices — “Did you see it twitch?” “ — and when he 
killed it — just like that!” 



Page | 241 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They were talking about the lesson, Harry thought, as 
though it had been some sort of spectacular show, 
but he hadn’t found it very entertaining — and nor, it 
seemed, had Hermione. 

“Hurry up,” she said tensely to Harry and Ron. 

“Not the ruddy library again?” said Ron. 

“No,” said Hermione curtly, pointing up a side 
passage. “Neville.” 

Neville was standing alone, halfway up the passage, 
staring at the stone wall opposite him with the same 
horrified, wide-eyed look he had worn when Moody 
had demonstrated the Cruciatus Curse. 

“Neville?” Hermione said gently. 

Neville looked around. 

“Oh hello,” he said, his voice much higher than usual. 
“Interesting lesson, wasn’t it? I wonder what’s for 
dinner, I’m — I’m starving, aren’t you?” 

“Neville, are you all right?” said Hermione. 

“Oh yes, I’m fine,” Neville gabbled in the same 
unnaturally high voice. “Very interesting dinner — I 
mean lesson — what’s for eating?” 

Ron gave Harry a startled look. 

“Neville, what — ?” 

But an odd clunking noise sounded behind them, and 
they turned to see Professor Moody limping toward 
them. All four of them fell silent, watching him 



Page | 242 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




apprehensively, but when he spoke, it was in a much 
lower and gentler growl than they had yet heard. 

“It’s all right, sonny,” he said to Neville. “Why don’t 
you come up to my office? Come on . . . we can have a 
cup of tea. ...” 

Neville looked even more frightened at the prospect of 
tea with Moody. He neither moved nor spoke. Moody 
turned his magical eye upon Harry. 

“You all right, are you, Potter?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, almost defiantly. 

Moody’s blue eye quivered slightly in its socket as it 
surveyed Harry. Then he said, “You’ve got to know. It 
seems harsh, maybe, but you’ve got to know. No point 
pretending ... well ... come on, Longbottom, I’ve got 
some books that might interest you.” 

Neville looked pleadingly at Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione, but they didn’t say anything, so Neville 
had no choice but to allow himself to be steered away, 
one of Moody’s gnarled hands on his shoulder. 

“What was that about?” said Ron, watching Neville 
and Moody turn the corner. 

“I don’t know,” said Hermione, looking pensive. 

“Some lesson, though, eh?” said Ron to Harry as they 
set off for the Great Hall. “Fred and George were right, 
weren’t they? He really knows his stuff, Moody, 
doesn’t he? When he did Avada Kedavra, the way that 
spider just died, just snuffed it right — ” 

But Ron fell suddenly silent at the look on Harry’s 
face and didn’t speak again until they reached the 

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Great Hall, when he said he supposed they had better 
make a start on Professor Trelawney’s predictions 
tonight, since they would take hours. 

Hermione did not join in with Harry and Ron’s 
conversation during dinner, but ate furiously fast, 
and then left for the library again. Harry and Ron 
walked back to Gryffindor Tower, and Harry, who had 
been thinking of nothing else all through dinner, now 
raised the subject of the Unforgivable Curses himself. 

“Wouldn’t Moody and Dumbledore be in trouble with 
the Ministry if they knew we’d seen the curses?” 

Harry asked as they approached the Fat Lady. 

“Yeah, probably,” said Ron. “But Dumbledore’s always 
done things his way, hasn’t he, and Moody’s been 
getting in trouble for years, I reckon. Attacks first and 
asks questions later — look at his dustbins. 
Balderdash.” 

The Fat Lady swung forward to reveal the entrance 
hole, and they climbed into the Gryffindor common 
room, which was crowded and noisy. 

“Shall we get our Divination stuff, then?” said Harry. 

“I s’pose,” Ron groaned. 

They went up to the dormitory to fetch their books 
and charts, to find Neville there alone, sitting on his 
bed, reading. He looked a good deal calmer than at 
the end of Moody’s lesson, though still not entirely 
normal. His eyes were rather red. 

“You all right, Neville?” Harry asked him. 

“Oh yes,” said Neville, “I’m fine, thanks. Just reading 
this book Professor Moody lent me. ...” 

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He held up the book: Magical Water Plants of the 
Mediterranean. 

“Apparently, Professor Sprout told Professor Moody 
I’m really good at Herbology,” Neville said. There was 
a faint note of pride in his voice that Harry had rarely 
heard there before. “He thought I’d like this.” 

Telling Neville what Professor Sprout had said, Harry 
thought, had been a very tactful way of cheering 
Neville up, for Neville very rarely heard that he was 
good at anything. It was the sort of thing Professor 
Lupin would have done. 

Harry and Ron took their copies of Unfogging the 
Future back down to the common room, found a 
table, and set to work on their predictions for the 
coming month. An hour later, they had made very 
little progress, though their table was littered with 
bits of parchment bearing sums and symbols, and 
Harry’s brain was as fogged as though it had been 
filled with the fumes from Professor Trelawney’s fire. 

“I haven’t got a clue what this lot’s supposed to 
mean,” he said, staring down at a long list of 
calculations. 

“You know,” said Ron, whose hair was on end 
because of all the times he had run his fingers 
through it in frustration, “I think it’s back to the old 
Divination standby.” 

“What — make it up?” 

“Yeah,” said Ron, sweeping the jumble of scrawled 
notes off the table, dipping his pen into some ink, and 
starting to write. 



Page | 245 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Next Monday,” he said as he scribbled, “I am likely to 
develop a cough, owing to the unlucky conjunction of 
Mars and Jupiter.” He looked up at Harry. “You know 
her — just put in loads of misery, shell lap it up.” 

“Right,” said Harry, crumpling up his first attempt 
and lobbing it over the heads of a group of chattering 
first years into the fire. “Okay ... on Monday, / will be 
in danger of — er — burns.” 

“Yeah, you will be,” said Ron darkly, “we’re seeing the 
skrewts again on Monday. Okay, Tuesday, I’ll ... erm 



“Lose a treasured possession,” said Harry, who was 
flicking through Unfogging the Future for ideas. 

“Good one,” said Ron, copying it down. “Because of 
... erm ... Mercury. Why don’t you get stabbed in the 
back by someone you thought was a friend?” 

“Yeah ... cool ...” said Harry, scribbling it down, 
“because ... Venus is in the twelfth house.” 

“And on Wednesday, I think I’ll come off worst in a 
fight.” 

“Aaah, I was going to have a fight. Okay, I’ll lose a 
bet.” 

“Yeah, you’ll be betting I’ll win my fight. ...” 

They continued to make up predictions (which grew 
steadily more tragic) for another hour, while the 
common room around them slowly emptied as people 
went up to bed. Crookshanks wandered over to them, 
leapt lightly into an empty chair, and stared 
inscrutably at Harry, rather as Hermione might look if 
she knew they weren’t doing their homework properly. 
Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Staring around the room, trying to think of a kind of 
misfortune he hadn’t yet used, Harry saw Fred and 
George sitting together against the opposite wall, 
heads together, quills out, poring over a single piece 
of parchment. It was most unusual to see Fred and 
George hidden away in a corner and working silently; 
they usually liked to be in the thick of things and the 
noisy center of attention. There was something 
secretive about the way they were working on the 
piece of parchment, and Harry was reminded of how 
they had sat together writing something back at the 
Burrow. He had thought then that it was another 
order form for Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, but it didn’t 
look like that this time; if it had been, they would 
surely have let Lee Jordan in on the joke. He 
wondered whether it had anything to do with entering 
the Triwizard Tournament. 

As Harry watched, George shook his head at Fred, 
scratched out something with his quill, and said, in a 
very quiet voice that nevertheless carried across the 
almost deserted room, “No — that sounds like we’re 
accusing him. Got to be careful ...” 

Then George looked over and saw Harry watching 
him. Harry grinned and quickly returned to his 
predictions — he didn’t want George to think he was 
eavesdropping. Shortly after that, the twins rolled up 
their parchment, said good night, and went off to bed. 

Fred and George had been gone ten minutes or so 
when the portrait hole opened and Hermione climbed 
into the common room carrying a sheaf of parchment 
in one hand and a box whose contents rattled as she 
walked in the other. Crookshanks arched his back, 
purring. 

“Hello,” she said, “I’ve just finished!” 



Page | 247 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“So have I!” said Ron triumphantly, throwing down 
his quill. 

Hermione sat down, laid the things she was carrying 
in an empty armchair, and pulled Ron’s predictions 
toward her. 

“Not going to have a very good month, are you?” she 
said sardonically as Crookshanks curled up in her 
lap. 

“Ah well, at least I’m forewarned,” Ron yawned. 

“You seem to be drowning twice,” said Hermione. 

“Oh am I?” said Ron, peering down at his predictions. 
“I’d better change one of them to getting trampled by 
a rampaging hippogriff.” 

“Don’t you think it’s a bit obvious you’ve made these 
up?” said Hermione. 

“How dare you!” said Ron, in mock outrage. “We’ve 
been working like house-elves here!” 

Hermione raised her eyebrows. 

“It’s just an expression,” said Ron hastily. 

Harry laid down his quill too, having just finished 
predicting his own death by decapitation. 

“What’s in the box?” he asked, pointing at it. 

“Funny you should ask,” said Hermione, with a nasty 
look at Ron. She took off the lid and showed them the 
contents. 



Page | 248 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Inside were about fifty badges, all of different colors, 
but all bearing the same letters: S.P.E.W. 

“ ‘Spew?” said Harry, picking up a badge and looking 
at it. “What’s this about?” 

“Not spew,” said Hermione impatiently. “It’s S-P-E-W. 
Stands for the Society for the Promotion of Elfish 
Welfare.” 

“Never heard of it,” said Ron. 

“Well, of course you haven’t,” said Hermione briskly, 
“I’ve only just started it.” 

“Yeah?” said Ron in mild surprise. “How many 
members have you got?” 

“Well — if you two join — three,” said Hermione. 

“And you think we want to walk around wearing 
badges saying ‘spew,’ do you?” said Ron. 

“S-P-E-W!” said Hermione hotly. “I was going to put 
Stop the Outrageous Abuse of Our Fellow Magical 
Creatures and Campaign for a Change in Their Legal 
Status — but it wouldn’t fit. So that’s the heading of 
our manifesto.” 

She brandished the sheaf of parchment at them. 

“I’ve been researching it thoroughly in the library. Elf 
enslavement goes back centuries. I can’t believe no 
one’s done anything about it before now.” 

“Hermione — open your ears,” said Ron loudly. “They. 
Like. It. They like being enslaved!” 



Page | 249 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Our short-term aims,” said Hermione, speaking even 
more loudly than Ron, and acting as though she 
hadn’t heard a word, “are to secure house-elves fair 
wages and working conditions. Our long-term aims 
include changing the law about non-wand use, and 
trying to get an elf into the Department for the 
Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures, because 
they’re shockingly underrepresented.” 

“And how do we do all this?” Harry asked. 

“We start by recruiting members,” said Hermione 
happily. “I thought two Sickles to join — that buys a 
badge — and the proceeds can fund our leaflet 
campaign. You’re treasurer, Ron — I’ve got you a 
collecting tin upstairs — and Harry, you’re secretary, 
so you might want to write down everything I’m 
saying now, as a record of our first meeting.” 

There was a pause in which Hermione beamed at the 
pair of them, and Harry sat, torn between 
exasperation at Hermione and amusement at the look 
on Ron’s face. The silence was broken, not by Ron, 
who in any case looked as though he was temporarily 
dumbstruck, but by a soft tap, tap on the window. 
Harry looked across the now empty common room 
and saw, illuminated by the moonlight, a snowy owl 
perched on the windowsill. 

“Hedwig!” he shouted, and he launched himself out of 
his chair and across the room to pull open the 
window. 

Hedwig flew inside, soared across the room, and 
landed on the table on top of Harry’s predictions. 

“About time!” said Harry, hurrying after her. 



Page | 250 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“She’s got an answer!” said Ron excitedly, pointing at 
the grubby piece of parchment tied to Hedwig’s leg. 

Harry hastily untied it and sat down to read, 
whereupon Hedwig fluttered onto his knee, hooting 
softly. 

“What does it say?” Hermione asked breathlessly. 

The letter was very short, and looked as though it had 
been scrawled in a great hurry. Harry read it aloud: 

Harry — 

I’m flying north immediately. This news about your 
scar is the latest in a series of strange rumors that 
have reached me here. If it hurts again , go straight to 
Dumbledore — they’re saying he’s got Mad-Eye out of 
retirement, which means he’s reading the signs, even if 
no one else is. 

I’ll be in touch soon. My best to Ron and Hermione. 

Keep your eyes open, Harry. 

Sirius 

Harry looked up at Ron and Hermione, who stared 
back at him. 

“He’s flying north?” Hermione whispered. “He’s 
coming back?” 

“Dumbledore’s reading what signs?” said Ron, looking 
perplexed. “Harry — what’s up?” 

For Harry had just hit himself in the forehead with 
his fist, jolting Hedwig out of his lap. 

“I shouldn’t’ve told him!” Harry said furiously. 

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What are you on about?” said Ron in surprise. 



“It’s made him think he’s got to come back!” said 
Harry, now slamming his fist on the table so that 
Hedwig landed on the back of Ron’s chair, hooting 
indignantly. “Coming back, because he thinks I’m in 
trouble! And there’s nothing wrong with me! And I 
haven’t got anything for you,” Harry snapped at 
Hedwig, who was clicking her beak expectantly, 

“you’ll have to go up to the Owlery if you want food.” 

Hedwig gave him an extremely offended look and took 
off for the open window, cuffing him around the head 
with her outstretched wing as she went. 

“Harry,” Hermione began, in a pacifying sort of voice. 

“I’m going to bed,” said Harry shortly. “See you in the 
morning.” 

Upstairs in the dormitory he pulled on his pajamas 
and got into his four-poster, but he didn’t feel 
remotely tired. 

If Sirius came back and got caught, it would be his, 
Harry’s, fault. Why hadn’t he kept his mouth shut? A 
few seconds’ pain and he’d had to blab. ... If he’d just 
had the sense to keep it to himself. . . . 

He heard Ron come up into the dormitory a short 
while later, but did not speak to him. For a long time, 
Harry lay staring up at the dark canopy of his bed. 
The dormitory was completely silent, and, had he 
been less preoccupied, Harry would have realized that 
the absence of Neville’s usual snores meant that he 
was not the only one lying awake. 



Page | 252 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






BEAUXBATONS AND DRUMSTRANG 

Early next morning, Harry woke with a plan fully 
formed in his mind, as though his sleeping brain had 
been working on it all night. He got up, dressed in the 
pale dawn light, left the dormitory without waking 
Ron, and went back down to the deserted common 
room. Here he took a piece of parchment from the 
table upon which his Divination homework still lay 
and wrote the following letter: 

Dear Sirius, 

I reckon I just imagined my scar hurting, I was half 
asleep when I wrote to you last time. There’s no point 
coming back, everything’s fine here. Don’t worry about 
me, my head feels completely normal. 

Harry 

He then climbed out of the portrait hole, up through 
the silent castle (held up only briefly by Peeves, who 
tried to overturn a large vase on him halfway along 



Page | 253 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



the fourth-floor corridor), finally arriving at the 
Owlery, which was situated at the top of West Tower. 

The Owlery was a circular stone room, rather cold 
and drafty, because none of the windows had glass in 
them. The floor was entirely covered in straw, owl 
droppings, and the regurgitated skeletons of mice and 
voles. Hundreds upon hundreds of owls of every 
breed imaginable were nestled here on perches that 
rose right up to the top of the tower, nearly all of 
them asleep, though here and there a round amber 
eye glared at Harry. He spotted Hedwig nestled 
between a barn owl and a tawny, and hurried over to 
her, sliding a little on the dropping-strewn floor. 

It took him a while to persuade her to wake up and 
then to look at him, as she kept shuffling around on 
her perch, showing him her tail. She was evidently 
still furious about his lack of gratitude the previous 
night. In the end, it was Harry suggesting she might 
be too tired, and that perhaps he would ask Ron to 
borrow Pigwidgeon, that made her stick out her leg 
and allow him to tie the letter to it. 

“Just find him, all right?” Harry said, stroking her 
back as he carried her on his arm to one of the holes 
in the wall. “Before the dementors do.” 

She nipped his finger, perhaps rather harder than she 
would ordinarily have done, but hooted softly in a 
reassuring sort of way all the same. Then she spread 
her wings and took off into the sunrise. Harry 
watched her fly out of sight with the familiar feeling of 
unease back in his stomach. He had been so sure 
that Sirius’s reply would alleviate his worries rather 
than increasing them. 

“That was a lie, Harry,” said Hermione sharply over 
breakfast, when he told her and Ron what he had 

Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




done. “You didn’t imagine your scar hurting and you 
know it.” 

“So what?” said Harry. “He’s not going back to 
Azkaban because of me.” 

“Drop it,” said Ron sharply to Hermione as she 
opened her mouth to argue some more, and for once, 
Hermione heeded him, and fell silent. 

Harry did his best not to worry about Sirius over the 
next couple of weeks. True, he could not stop himself 
from looking anxiously around every morning when 
the post owls arrived, nor, late at night before he went 
to sleep, prevent himself from seeing horrible visions 
of Sirius, cornered by dementors down some dark 
London street, but betweentimes he tried to keep his 
mind off his godfather. He wished he still had 
Quidditch to distract him; nothing worked so well on 
a troubled mind as a good, hard training session. On 
the other hand, their lessons were becoming more 
difficult and demanding than ever before, particularly 
Moody’s Defense Against the Dark Arts. 

To their surprise, Professor Moody had announced 
that he would be putting the Imperius Curse on each 
of them in turn, to demonstrate its power and to see 
whether they could resist its effects. 

“But — but you said it’s illegal, Professor,” said 
Hermione uncertainly as Moody cleared away the 
desks with a sweep of his wand, leaving a large clear 
space in the middle of the room. “You said — to use it 
against another human was — ” 

“Dumbledore wants you taught what it feels like,” 
said Moody, his magical eye swiveling onto Hermione 
and fixing her with an eerie, unblinking stare. “If 
you’d rather learn the hard way — when someone’s 

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




putting it on you so they can control you completely 
— fine by me. You’re excused. Off you go.” 

He pointed one gnarled finger toward the door. 
Hermione went very pink and muttered something 
about not meaning that she wanted to leave. Harry 
and Ron grinned at each other. They knew Hermione 
would rather eat bubotuber pus than miss such an 
important lesson. 

Moody began to beckon students forward in turn and 
put the Imperius Curse upon them. Harry watched 
as, one by one, his classmates did the most 
extraordinary things under its influence. Dean 
Thomas hopped three times around the room, singing 
the national anthem. Lavender Brown imitated a 
squirrel. Neville performed a series of quite 
astonishing gymnastics he would certainly not have 
been capable of in his normal state. Not one of them 
seemed to be able to fight off the curse, and each of 
them recovered only when Moody had removed it. 

“Potter,” Moody growled, “you next.” 

Harry moved forward into the middle of the 
classroom, into the space that Moody had cleared of 
desks. Moody raised his wand, pointed it at Harry, 
and said, “Imperio\” 

It was the most wonderful feeling. Harry felt a floating 
sensation as every thought and worry in his head was 
wiped gently away, leaving nothing but a vague, 
untraceable happiness. He stood there feeling 
immensely relaxed, only dimly aware of everyone 
watching him. 

And then he heard Mad-Eye Moody’s voice, echoing in 
some distant chamber of his empty brain: Jump onto 
the desk . . . jump onto the desk. . . . 

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry bent his knees obediently, preparing to spring. 
Jump onto the desk. ... 

Why, though? Another voice had awoken in the back 
of his brain. 

Stupid thing to do, really, said the voice. 

Jump onto the desk. ... 

No, I don’t think I will, thanks, said the other voice, a 
little more firmly ... no, I don’t really want to. ... 

Jump\ NOW 

The next thing Harry felt was considerable pain. He 
had both jumped and tried to prevent himself from 
jumping — the result was that he’d smashed 
headlong into the desk, knocking it over, and, by the 
feeling in his legs, fractured both his kneecaps. 

“Now, that’s more like it!” growled Moody’s voice, and 
suddenly, Harry felt the empty, echoing feeling in his 
head disappear. He remembered exactly what was 
happening, and the pain in his knees seemed to 
double. 

“Look at that, you lot ... Potter fought! He fought it, 
and he damn near beat it! We’ll try that again, Potter, 
and the rest of you, pay attention — watch his eyes, 
that’s where you see it — very good, Potter, very good 
indeed! They’ll have trouble controlling you!” 



“The way he talks,” Harry muttered as he hobbled out 
of the Defense Against the Dark Arts class an hour 
later (Moody had insisted on putting Harry through 

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




his paces four times in a row, until Harry could throw 
off the curse entirely), “you’d think we were all going 
to be attacked any second.” 

“Yeah, I know,” said Ron, who was skipping on every 
alternate step. He had had much more difficulty with 
the curse than Harry, though Moody assured him the 
effects would wear off by lunch-time. “Talk about 
paranoid ...” Ron glanced nervously over his shoulder 
to check that Moody was definitely out of earshot and 
went on. “No wonder they were glad to get shot of him 
at the Ministry. Did you hear him telling Seamus 
what he did to that witch who shouted ‘Boo’ behind 
him on April Fools’ Day? And when are we supposed 
to read up on resisting the Imperius Curse with 
everything else we’ve got to do?” 

All the fourth years had noticed a definite increase in 
the amount of work they were required to do this 
term. Professor McGonagall explained why, when the 
class gave a particularly loud groan at the amount of 
Transfiguration homework she had assigned. 

“You are now entering a most important phase of your 
magical education!” she told them, her eyes glinting 
dangerously behind her square spectacles. “Your 
Ordinary Wizarding Levels are drawing closer — ” 

“We don’t take O.W.L.s till fifth year!” said Dean 
Thomas indignantly. 

“Maybe not, Thomas, but believe me, you need all the 
preparation you can get! Miss Granger remains the 
only person in this class who has managed to turn a 
hedgehog into a satisfactory pincushion. I might 
remind you that your pincushion, Thomas, still curls 
up in fright if anyone approaches it with a pin!” 



Page | 258 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione, who had turned rather pink again, seemed 
to be trying not to look too pleased with herself. 

Harry and Ron were deeply amused when Professor 
Trelawney told them that they had received top marks 
for their homework in their next Divination class. She 
read out large portions of their predictions, 
commending them for their unflinching acceptance of 
the horrors in store for them — but they were less 
amused when she asked them to do the same thing 
for the month after next; both of them were running 
out of ideas for catastrophes. 

Meanwhile Professor Binns, the ghost who taught 
History of Magic, had them writing weekly essays on 
the goblin rebellions of the eighteenth century. 
Professor Snape was forcing them to research 
antidotes. They took this one seriously, as he had 
hinted that he might be poisoning one of them before 
Christmas to see if their antidote worked. Professor 
Flitwick had asked them to read three extra books in 
preparation for their lesson on Summoning Charms. 

Even Hagrid was adding to their workload. The Blast- 
Ended Skrewts were growing at a remarkable pace 
given that nobody had yet discovered what they ate. 
Hagrid was delighted, and as part of their “project,” 
suggested that they come down to his hut on 
alternate evenings to observe the skrewts and make 
notes on their extraordinary behavior. 

“I will not,” said Draco Malfoy flatly when Hagrid had 
proposed this with the air of Father Christmas pulling 
an extra- large toy out of his sack. “I see enough of 
these foul things during lessons, thanks.” 

Hagrid ’s smile faded off his face. 



Page | 259 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeh’ll do wha’yer told,” he growled, “or I’ll be takin’ a 
leaf outta Professor Moody’s book. ... I hear yeh made 
a good ferret, Malfoy.” 

The Gryffindors roared with laughter. Malfoy flushed 
with anger, but apparently the memory of Moody’s 
punishment was still sufficiently painful to stop him 
from retorting. Harry, Ron, and Hermione returned to 
the castle at the end of the lesson in high spirits; 
seeing Hagrid put down Malfoy was particularly 
satisfying, especially because Malfoy had done his 
very best to get Hagrid sacked the previous year. 

When they arrived in the entrance hall, they found 
themselves unable to proceed owing to the large 
crowd of students congregated there, all milling 
around a large sign that had been erected at the foot 
of the marble staircase. Ron, the tallest of the three, 
stood on tiptoe to see over the heads in front of them 
and read the sign aloud to the other two: 

TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT 

The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang 
will be arriving at 6 o’clock on Friday the 30th of 
October. Lessons will end half an hour early — 

“Brilliant!” said Harry. “It’s Potions last thing on 
Friday! Snape won’t have time to poison us all!” 

Students will return their bags and books to their 
dormitories and assemble in front of the castle to 
greet our guests before the Welcoming Feast. 



“Only a week away!” said Ernie Macmillan of 
Hufflepuff, emerging from the crowd, his eyes 



Page | 260 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




gleaming. “I wonder if Cedric knows? Think 111 go and 
tell him. ...” 



“Cedric?” said Ron blankly as Ernie hurried off. 

“Diggory,” said Harry. “He must be entering the 
tournament.” 

“That idiot, Hogwarts champion?” said Ron as they 
pushed their way through the chattering crowd 
toward the staircase. 

“He’s not an idiot. You just don’t like him because he 
beat Gryffindor at Quidditch,” said Hermione. “I’ve 
heard he’s a really good student — and he’s a 
prefect.” 

She spoke as though this settled the matter. 

“You only like him because he’s handsome,” said Ron 
scathingly. 

“Excuse me, I don’t like people just because they’re 
handsome!” said Hermione indignantly. 

Ron gave a loud false cough, which sounded oddly 
like “Lockhart\” 

The appearance of the sign in the entrance hall had a 
marked effect upon the inhabitants of the castle. 
During the following week, there seemed to be only 
one topic of conversation, no matter where Harry 
went: the Triwizard Tournament. Rumors were flying 
from student to student like highly contagious germs: 
who was going to try for Hogwarts champion, what 
the tournament would involve, how the students from 
Beauxbatons and Durmstrang differed from 
themselves. 

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry noticed too that the castle seemed to be 
undergoing an extra-thorough cleaning. Several grimy 
portraits had been scrubbed, much to the displeasure 
of their subjects, who sat huddled in their frames 
muttering darkly and wincing as they felt their raw 
pink faces. The suits of armor were suddenly 
gleaming and moving without squeaking, and Argus 
Filch, the caretaker, was behaving so ferociously to 
any students who forgot to wipe their shoes that he 
terrified a pair of first-year girls into hysterics. 

Other members of the staff seemed oddly tense too. 

“Longbottom, kindly do not reveal that you can’t even 
perform a simple Switching Spell in front of anyone 
from Durmstrang!” Professor McGonagall barked at 
the end of one particularly difficult lesson, during 
which Neville had accidentally transplanted his own 
ears onto a cactus. 

When they went down to breakfast on the morning of 
the thirtieth of October, they found that the Great 
Hall had been decorated overnight. Enormous silk 
banners hung from the walls, each of them 
representing a Hogwarts House: red with a gold lion 
for Gryffindor, blue with a bronze eagle for 
Ravenclaw, yellow with a black badger for Hufflepuff, 
and green with a silver serpent for Slytherin. Behind 
the teachers’ table, the largest banner of all bore the 
Hogwarts coat of arms: lion, eagle, badger, and snake 
united around a large letter H. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat down beside Fred and 
George at the Gryffindor table. Once again, and most 
unusually, they were sitting apart from everyone else 
and conversing in low voices. Ron led the way over to 
them. 



Page | 262 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s a bummer, all right,” George was saying gloomily 
to Fred. “But if he won’t talk to us in person, we’ll 
have to send him the letter after all. Or we’ll stuff it 
into his hand. He can’t avoid us forever.” 

“Who’s avoiding you?” said Ron, sitting down next to 
them. 

“Wish you would,” said Fred, looking irritated at the 
interruption. 

“What’s a bummer?” Ron asked George. 

“Having a nosy git like you for a brother,” said George. 

“You two got any ideas on the Triwizard Tournament 
yet?” Harry asked. “Thought any more about trying to 
enter?” 

“I asked McGonagall how the champions are chosen 
but she wasn’t telling,” said George bitterly. “She just 
told me to shut up and get on with transfiguring my 
raccoon.” 

“Wonder what the tasks are going to be?” said Ron 
thoughtfully. “You know, I bet we could do them, 
Harry. We’ve done dangerous stuff before. ...” 

“Not in front of a panel of judges, you haven’t,” said 
Fred. “McGonagall says the champions get awarded 
points according to how well they’ve done the tasks.” 

“Who are the judges?” Harry asked. 

“Well, the Heads of the participating schools are 
always on the panel,” said Hermione, and everyone 
looked around at her, rather surprised, “because all 
three of them were injured during the Tournament of 



Page | 263 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




1792, when a cockatrice the champions were 
supposed to be catching went on the rampage.” 

She noticed them all looking at her and said, with her 
usual air of impatience that nobody else had read all 
the books she had, “It’s all in Hogwarts, A History. 
Though, of course, that book’s not entirely reliable. A 
Revised History of Hogwarts would be a more 
accurate title. Or A Highly Biased and Selective 
History of Hogwarts, Which Glosses Over the Nastier 
Aspects of the School.” 

“What are you on about?” said Ron, though Harry 
thought he knew what was coming. 

“ House-elves\” said Hermione, her eyes flashing. “Not 
once, in over a thousand pages, does Hogwarts, A 
History mention that we are all colluding in the 
oppression of a hundred slaves!” 

Harry shook his head and applied himself to his 
scrambled eggs. His and Ron’s lack of enthusiasm 
had done nothing whatsoever to curb Hermione ’s 
determination to pursue justice for house-elves. True, 
both of them had paid two Sickles for a S.P.E.W. 
badge, but they had only done it to keep her quiet. 
Their Sickles had been wasted, however; if anything, 
they seemed to have made Hermione more vociferous. 
She had been badgering Harry and Ron ever since, 
first to wear the badges, then to persuade others to do 
the same, and she had also taken to rattling around 
the Gryffindor common room every evening, cornering 
people and shaking the collecting tin under their 
noses. 

“You do realize that your sheets are changed, your 
fires lit, your classrooms cleaned, and your food 
cooked by a group of magical creatures who are 
unpaid and enslaved?” she kept saying fiercely. 

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Some people, like Neville, had paid up just to stop 
Hermione from glowering at them. A few seemed 
mildly interested in what she had to say, but were 
reluctant to take a more active role in campaigning. 
Many regarded the whole thing as a joke. 

Ron now rolled his eyes at the ceiling, which was 
flooding them all in autumn sunlight, and Fred 
became extremely interested in his bacon (both twins 
had refused to buy a S.P.E.W. badge). George, 
however, leaned in toward Hermione. 

“Listen, have you ever been down in the kitchens, 
Hermione?” 

“No, of course not,” said Hermione curtly, “I hardly 
think students are supposed to — ” 

“Well, we have,” said George, indicating Fred, “loads 
of times, to nick food. And we’ve met them, and 
they’re happy. They think they’ve got the best job in 
the world — ” 

“That’s because they’re uneducated and 
brainwashed!” Hermione began hotly, but her next 
few words were drowned out by the sudden 
whooshing noise from overhead, which announced 
the arrival of the post owls. Harry looked up at once, 
and saw Hedwig soaring toward him. Hermione 
stopped talking abruptly; she and Ron watched 
Hedwig anxiously as she fluttered down onto Harry’s 
shoulder, folded her wings, and held out her leg 
wearily. 

Harry pulled off Sirius’s reply and offered Hedwig his 
bacon rinds, which she ate gratefully. Then, checking 
that Fred and George were safely immersed in further 
discussions about the Tri-wizard Tournament, Harry 



Page | 265 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




read out Sirius’s letter in a whisper to Ron and 
Hermione. 



Nice try, Harry. 

I’m back in the country and well hidden. I want you to 
keep me posted on everything that’s going on at 
Hog warts. Don’t use Hedwig, keep changing owls, and 
don’t worry about me, just watch out for yourself. Don’t 
forget what I said about your scar. 

Sirius 

“Why d’you have to keep changing owls?” Ron asked 
in a low voice. 

“Hedwig’ll attract too much attention,” said Hermione 
at once. “She stands out. A snowy owl that keeps 
returning to wherever he’s hiding ... I mean, they’re 
not native birds, are they?” 

Harry rolled up the letter and slipped it inside his 
robes, wondering whether he felt more or less worried 
than before. He supposed that Sirius managing to get 
back without being caught was something. He 
couldn’t deny either that the idea that Sirius was 
much nearer was reassuring; at least he wouldn’t 
have to wait so long for a response every time he 
wrote. 

“Thanks, Hedwig,” he said, stroking her. She hooted 
sleepily, dipped her beak briefly into his goblet of 
orange juice, then took off again, clearly desperate for 
a good long sleep in the Owlery. 

There was a pleasant feeling of anticipation in the air 
that day. Nobody was very attentive in lessons, being 
much more interested in the arrival that evening of 
the people from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang; even 

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Potions was more bearable than usual, as it was half 
an hour shorter. When the bell rang early, Harry, 

Ron, and Hermione hurried up to Gryffindor Tower, 
deposited their bags and books as they had been 
instructed, pulled on their cloaks, and rushed back 
downstairs into the entrance hall. 

The Heads of Houses were ordering their students 
into lines. 

“Weasley, straighten your hat,” Professor McGonagall 
snapped at Ron. “Miss Patil, take that ridiculous 
thing out of your hair.” 

Parvati scowled and removed a large ornamental 
butterfly from the end of her plait. 

“Follow me, please,” said Professor McGonagall. “First 
years in front ... no pushing. ...” 

They filed down the steps and lined up in front of the 
castle. It was a cold, clear evening; dusk was falling 
and a pale, transparent-looking moon was already 
shining over the Forbidden Forest. Harry, standing 
between Ron and Hermione in the fourth row from 
the front, saw Dennis Creevey positively shivering 
with anticipation among the other first years. 

“Nearly six,” said Ron, checking his watch and then 
staring down the drive that led to the front gates. 
“How d’you reckon they’re coming? The train?” 

“I doubt it,” said Hermione. 

“How, then? Broomsticks?” Harry suggested, looking 
up at the starry sky. 

“I don’t think so ... not from that far away. ...” 



Page | 267 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“A Portkey?” Ron suggested. “Or they could Apparate 
— maybe you’re allowed to do it under seventeen 
wherever they come from?” 

“You can’t Apparate inside the Hogwarts grounds, 
how often do I have to tell you?” said Hermione 
impatiently. 

They scanned the darkening grounds excitedly, but 
nothing was moving; everything was still, silent, and 
quite as usual. Harry was starting to feel cold. He 
wished they’d hurry up. ... Maybe the foreign 
students were preparing a dramatic entrance. ... He 
remembered what Mr. Weasley had said back at the 
campsite before the Quidditch World Cup: “always the 
same — we can’t resist showing off when we get 
together. ...” 

And then Dumbledore called out from the back row 
where he stood with the other teachers — 

“Aha! Unless I am very much mistaken, the delegation 
from Beauxbatons approaches!” 

“Where?” said many students eagerly, all looking in 
different directions. 

“There!” yelled a sixth year, pointing over the forest. 

Something large, much larger than a broomstick — 
or, indeed, a hundred broomsticks — was hurtling 
across the deep blue sky toward the castle, growing 
larger all the time. 

“It’s a dragon!” shrieked one of the first years, losing 
her head completely. 

“Don’t be stupid ... it’s a flying house!” said Dennis 
Creevey. 

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dennis’s guess was closer. ... As the gigantic black 
shape skimmed over the treetops of the Forbidden 
Forest and the lights shining from the castle windows 
hit it, they saw a gigantic, powder-blue, horse-drawn 
carriage, the size of a large house, soaring toward 
them, pulled through the air by a dozen winged 
horses, all palominos, and each the size of an 
elephant. 

The front three rows of students drew backward as 
the carriage hurtled ever lower, coming in to land at a 
tremendous speed — then, with an almighty crash 
that made Neville jump backward onto a Slytherin 
fifth year’s foot, the horses’ hooves, larger than dinner 
plates, hit the ground. A second later, the carriage 
landed too, bouncing upon its vast wheels, while the 
golden horses tossed their enormous heads and rolled 
large, fiery red eyes. 

Harry just had time to see that the door of the 
carriage bore a coat of arms (two crossed, golden 
wands, each emitting three stars) before it opened. 

A boy in pale blue robes jumped down from the 
carriage, bent forward, fumbled for a moment with 
something on the carriage floor, and unfolded a set of 
golden steps. He sprang back respectfully. Then 
Harry saw a shining, high-heeled black shoe emerging 
from the inside of the carriage — a shoe the size of a 
child’s sled — followed, almost immediately, by the 
largest woman he had ever seen in his life. The size of 
the carriage, and of the horses, was immediately 
explained. A few people gasped. 

Harry had only ever seen one person as large as this 
woman in his life, and that was Hagrid; he doubted 
whether there was an inch difference in their heights. 
Yet somehow — maybe simply because he was used 
to Hagrid — this woman (now at the foot of the steps, 
Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and looking around at the waiting, wide-eyed crowd) 
seemed even more unnaturally large. As she stepped 
into the light flooding from the entrance hall, she was 
revealed to have a handsome, olive-skinned face; 
large, black, liquid-looking eyes; and a rather beaky 
nose. Her hair was drawn back in a shining knob at 
the base of her neck. She was dressed from head to 
foot in black satin, and many magnificent opals 
gleamed at her throat and on her thick fingers. 

Dumbledore started to clap; the students, following 
his lead, broke into applause too, many of them 
standing on tiptoe, the better to look at this woman. 

Her face relaxed into a gracious smile and she walked 
forward toward Dumbledore, extending a glittering 
hand. Dumbledore, though tall himself, had barely to 
bend to kiss it. 

“My dear Madame Maxime,” he said. “Welcome to 
Hogwarts.” 

“Dumbly-dorr,” said Madame Maxime in a deep voice. 
“I ’ope I find you well?” 

“In excellent form, I thank you,” said Dumbledore. 

“My pupils,” said Madame Maxime, waving one of her 
enormous hands carelessly behind her. 

Harry, whose attention had been focused completely 
upon Madame Maxime, now noticed that about a 
dozen boys and girls, all, by the look of them, in their 
late teens, had emerged from the carriage and were 
now standing behind Madame Maxime. They were 
shivering, which was unsurprising, given that their 
robes seemed to be made of fine silk, and none of 
them were wearing cloaks. A few had wrapped scarves 
and shawls around their heads. From what Harry 
Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




could see of them (they were standing in Madame 
Maxime ’s enormous shadow), they were staring up at 
Hogwarts with apprehensive looks on their faces. 

“ ’As Karkaroff arrived yet?” Madame Maxime asked. 

“He should be here any moment,” said Dumbledore. 
“Would you like to wait here and greet him or would 
you prefer to step inside and warm up a trifle?” 

“Warm up, I think,” said Madame Maxime. “But ze 
’orses — ” 

“Our Care of Magical Creatures teacher will be 
delighted to take care of them,” said Dumbledore, “the 
moment he has returned from dealing with a slight 
situation that has arisen with some of his other — er 
— charges.” 

“Skrewts,” Ron muttered to Harry, grinning. 

“My steeds require — er — forceful ’andling,” said 
Madame Maxime, looking as though she doubted 
whether any Care of Magical Creatures teacher at 
Hogwarts could be up to the job. “Zey are very strong. 



“I assure you that Hagrid will be well up to the job,” 
said Dumbledore, smiling. 

“Very well,” said Madame Maxime, bowing slightly. 
“Will you please inform zis ’Agrid zat ze ’orses drink 
only single-malt whiskey?” 

“It will be attended to,” said Dumbledore, also bowing. 

“Come,” said Madame Maxime imperiously to her 
students, and the Hogwarts crowd parted to allow her 
and her students to pass up the stone steps. 

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“How big d’you reckon Durmstrang’s horses are going 
to be?” Seamus Finnigan said, leaning around 
Lavender and Parvati to address Harry and Ron. 

“Well, if they’re any bigger than this lot, even Hagrid 
won’t be able to handle them,” said Harry. “That’s if 
he hasn’t been attacked by his skrewts. Wonder 
what’s up with them?” 

“Maybe they’ve escaped,” said Ron hopefully. 

“Oh don’t say that,” said Hermione with a shudder. 
“Imagine that lot loose on the grounds. ...” 

They stood, shivering slightly now, waiting for the 
Durmstrang party to arrive. Most people were gazing 
hopefully up at the sky. For a few minutes, the 
silence was broken only by Madame Maxime’s huge 
horses snorting and stamping. But then — 

“Can you hear something?” said Ron suddenly. 

Harry listened; a loud and oddly eerie noise was 
drifting toward them from out of the darkness: a 
muffled rumbling and sucking sound, as though an 
immense vacuum cleaner were moving along a 
riverbed. ... 

“The lake!” yelled Lee Jordan, pointing down at it. 
“Look at the lake!” 

From their position at the top of the lawns 
overlooking the grounds, they had a clear view of the 
smooth black surface of the water — except that the 
surface was suddenly not smooth at all. Some 
disturbance was taking place deep in the center; great 
bubbles were forming on the surface, waves were now 
washing over the muddy banks — and then, out in 
the very middle of the lake, a whirlpool appeared, as if 
Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




a giant plug had just been pulled out of the lake’s 
floor. ... 

What seemed to be a long, black pole began to rise 
slowly out of the heart of the whirlpool . . . and then 
Harry saw the rigging. . . . 

“It’s a mast!” he said to Ron and Hermione. 

Slowly, magnificently, the ship rose out of the water, 
gleaming in the moonlight. It had a strangely skeletal 
look about it, as though it were a resurrected wreck, 
and the dim, misty lights shimmering at its portholes 
looked like ghostly eyes. Finally, with a great sloshing 
noise, the ship emerged entirely, bobbing on the 
turbulent water, and began to glide toward the bank. 
A few moments later, they heard the splash of an 
anchor being thrown down in the shallows, and the 
thud of a plank being lowered onto the bank. 

People were disembarking; they could see their 
silhouettes passing the lights in the ship’s portholes. 
All of them, Harry noticed, seemed to be built along 
the lines of Crabbe and Goyle . . . but then, as they 
drew nearer, walking up the lawns into the light 
streaming from the entrance hall, he saw that their 
bulk was really due to the fact that they were wearing 
cloaks of some kind of shaggy, matted fur. But the 
man who was leading them up to the castle was 
wearing furs of a different sort: sleek and silver, like 
his hair. 

“Dumbledore!” he called heartily as he walked up the 
slope. “How are you, my dear fellow, how are you?” 

“Blooming, thank you, Professor Karkaroff,” 
Dumbledore replied. 



Page | 273 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Karkaroff had a fruity, unctuous voice; when he 
stepped into the light pouring from the front doors of 
the castle they saw that he was tall and thin like 
Dumbledore, but his white hair was short, and his 
goatee (finishing in a small curl) did not entirely hide 
his rather weak chin. When he reached Dumbledore, 
he shook hands with both of his own. 

“Dear old Hogwarts,” he said, looking up at the castle 
and smiling; his teeth were rather yellow, and Harry 
noticed that his smile did not extend to his eyes, 
which remained cold and shrewd. “How good it is to 
be here, how good. ... Viktor, come along, into the 
warmth ... you don’t mind, Dumbledore? Viktor has a 
slight head cold. ...” 

Karkaroff beckoned forward one of his students. As 
the boy passed, Harry caught a glimpse of a 
prominent curved nose and thick black eyebrows. He 
didn’t need the punch on the arm Ron gave him, or 
the hiss in his ear, to recognize that profile. 

“Harry — it’s Krum\” 



Page | 274 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




t'fyfflapier- l6 




THE GOBLET OF FIRE 

“I don’t believe it!” Ron said, in a stunned voice, as 
the Hogwarts students filed back up the steps behind 
the party from Durmstrang. “Krum, Harry! Viktor 
Kruml” 

“For heaven’s sake, Ron, he’s only a Quidditch 
player,” said Hermione. 

“Only a Quidditch player?” Ron said, looking at her as 
though he couldn’t believe his ears. “Hermione — he’s 
one of the best Seekers in the world! I had no idea he 
was still at school!” 

As they recrossed the entrance hall with the rest of 
the Hogwarts students heading for the Great Hall, 
Harry saw Lee Jordan jumping up and down on the 
soles of his feet to get a better look at the back of 
Krum’s head. Several sixth-year girls were frantically 
searching their pockets as they walked — 

“Oh I don’t believe it, I haven’t got a single quill on me 

?? 



Page | 275 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“D’you think he’d sign my hat in lipstick?” 



“Really,” Hermione said loftily as they passed the 
girls, now squabbling over the lipstick. 

“I’m getting his autograph if I can,” said Ron. “You 
haven’t got a quill, have you, Harry?” 

“Nope, they’re upstairs in my bag,” said Harry. 

They walked over to the Gryffindor table and sat 
down. Ron took care to sit on the side facing the 
doorway, because Krum and his fellow Durmstrang 
students were still gathered around it, apparently 
unsure about where they should sit. The students 
from Beauxbatons had chosen seats at the Ravenclaw 
table. They were looking around the Great Hall with 
glum expressions on their faces. Three of them were 
still clutching scarves and shawls around their heads. 

“It’s not that cold,” said Hermione defensively. “Why 
didn’t they bring cloaks?” 

“Over here! Come and sit over here!” Ron hissed. 

“Over here! Hermione, budge up, make a space — ” 

“What?” 

“Too late,” said Ron bitterly. 

Viktor Krum and his fellow Durmstrang students had 
settled themselves at the Slytherin table. Harry could 
see Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle looking very smug 
about this. As he watched, Malfoy bent forward to 
speak to Krum. 

“Yeah, that’s right, smarm up to him, Malfoy,” said 
Ron scathingly. “I bet Krum can see right through 
him, though ... bet he gets people fawning over him 

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




all the time. ... Where d’you reckon they’re going to 
sleep? We could offer him a space in our dormitory, 
Harry ... I wouldn’t mind giving him my bed, I could 
kip on a camp bed.” 

Hermione snorted. 

“They look a lot happier than the Beauxbatons lot,” 
said Harry. 

The Durmstrang students were pulling off their heavy 
furs and looking up at the starry black ceiling with 
expressions of interest; a couple of them were picking 
up the golden plates and goblets and examining 
them, apparently impressed. 

Up at the staff table, Filch, the caretaker, was adding 
chairs. He was wearing his moldy old tailcoat in 
honor of the occasion. Harry was surprised to see 
that he added four chairs, two on either side of 
Dumbledore’s. 

“But there are only two extra people,” Harry said. 
“Why’s Filch putting out four chairs, who else is 
coming?” 

“Eh?” said Ron vaguely. He was still staring avidly at 
Krum. 

When all the students had entered the Hall and 
settled down at their House tables, the staff entered, 
filing up to the top table and taking their seats. Last 
in line were Professor Dumbledore, Professor 
Karkaroff, and Madame Maxime. When their 
headmistress appeared, the pupils from Beauxbatons 
leapt to their feet. A few of the Hogwarts students 
laughed. The Beauxbatons party appeared quite 
unembarrassed, however, and did not resume their 
seats until Madame Maxime had sat down on 
Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore ’s left-hand side. Dumbledore remained 
standing, and a silence fell over the Great Hall. 

“Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, ghosts and — 
most particularly — guests,” said Dumbledore, 
beaming around at the foreign students. “I have great 
pleasure in welcoming you all to Hogwarts. I hope and 
trust that your stay here will be both comfortable and 
enjoyable.” 

One of the Beauxbatons girls still clutching a muffler 
around her head gave what was unmistakably a 
derisive laugh. 

“No one’s making you stay!” Hermione whispered, 
bristling at her. 

“The tournament will be officially opened at the end of 
the feast,” said Dumbledore. “I now invite you all to 
eat, drink, and make yourselves at home!” 

He sat down, and Harry saw Karkaroff lean forward at 
once and engage him in conversation. 

The plates in front of them filled with food as usual. 
The house-elves in the kitchen seemed to have pulled 
out all the stops; there was a greater variety of dishes 
in front of them than Harry had ever seen, including 
several that were definitely foreign. 

“What’s that?” said Ron, pointing at a large dish of 
some sort of shellfish stew that stood beside a large 
steak-and-kidney pudding. 

“Bouillabaisse,” said Hermione. 

“Bless you,” said Ron. 



Page | 278 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s French,” said Hermione, “I had it on holiday 
summer before last. It’s very nice.” 

“I’ll take your word for it,” said Ron, helping himself 
to black pudding. 

The Great Hall seemed somehow much more crowded 
than usual, even though there were barely twenty 
additional students there; perhaps it was because 
their differently colored uniforms stood out so clearly 
against the black of the Hogwarts’ robes. Now that 
they had removed their furs, the Durmstrang 
students were revealed to be wearing robes of a deep 
bloodred. 

Hagrid sidled into the Hall through a door behind the 
staff table twenty minutes after the start of the feast. 
He slid into his seat at the end and waved at Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione with a very heavily bandaged 
hand. 

“Skrewts doing all right, Hagrid?” Harry called. 

“Thrivin’,” Hagrid called back happily. 

“Yeah, I’ll just bet they are,” said Ron quietly. “Looks 
like they’ve finally found a food they like, doesn’t it? 
Hagrid ’s fingers.” 

At that moment, a voice said, “Excuse me, are you 
wanting ze bouillabaisse?” 

It was the girl from Beauxbatons who had laughed 
during Dumbledore’s speech. She had finally removed 
her muffler. A long sheet of silvery-blonde hair fell 
almost to her waist. She had large, deep blue eyes, 
and very white, even teeth. 



Page | 279 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron went purple. He stared up at her, opened his 
mouth to reply, but nothing came out except a faint 
gurgling noise. 

“Yeah, have it,” said Harry, pushing the dish toward 
the girl. 

“You ’ave finished wiz it?” 

“Yeah,” Ron said breathlessly. “Yeah, it was 
excellent.” 

The girl picked up the dish and carried it carefully off 
to the Ravenclaw table. Ron was still goggling at the 
girl as though he had never seen one before. Harry 
started to laugh. The sound seemed to jog Ron back 
to his senses. 

“She’s a veelcd” he said hoarsely to Harry. 

“Of course she isn’t!” said Hermione tartly. “I don’t see 
anyone else gaping at her like an idiot!” 

But she wasn’t entirely right about that. As the girl 
crossed the Hall, many boys’ heads turned, and some 
of them seemed to have become temporarily 
speechless, just like Ron. 

“I’m telling you, that’s not a normal girl!” said Ron, 
leaning sideways so he could keep a clear view of her. 
“They don’t make them like that at Hogwarts!” 

“They make them okay at Hogwarts,” said Harry 
without thinking. Cho happened to be sitting only a 
few places away from the girl with the silvery hair. 

“When you’ve both put your eyes back in,” said 
Hermione briskly, “you’ll be able to see who’s just 
arrived.” 

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




She was pointing up at the staff table. The two 
remaining empty seats had just been filled. Ludo 
Bagman was now sitting on Professor Karkaroff’s 
other side, while Mr. Crouch, Percy’s boss, was next 
to Madame Maxime. 

“What are they doing here?” said Harry in surprise. 

“They organized the Triwizard Tournament, didn’t 
they?” said Hermione. “I suppose they wanted to be 
here to see it start.” 

When the second course arrived they noticed a 
number of unfamiliar desserts too. Ron examined an 
odd sort of pale blancmange closely, then moved it 
carefully a few inches to his right, so that it would be 
clearly visible from the Ravenclaw table. The girl who 
looked like a veela appeared to have eaten enough, 
however, and did not come over to get it. 

Once the golden plates had been wiped clean, 
Dumbledore stood up again. A pleasant sort of 
tension seemed to fill the Hall now. Harry felt a slight 
thrill of excitement, wondering what was coming. 
Several seats down from them, Fred and George were 
leaning forward, staring at Dumbledore with great 
concentration. 

“The moment has come,” said Dumbledore, smiling 
around at the sea of upturned faces. “The Triwizard 
Tournament is about to start. I would like to say a few 
words of explanation before we bring in the casket — ” 

“The what?” Harry muttered. 

Ron shrugged. 

“ — just to clarify the procedure that we will be 
following this year. But first, let me introduce, for 

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




those who do not know them, Mr. Bartemius Crouch, 
Head of the Department of International Magical 
Cooperation” — there was a smattering of polite 
applause — “and Mr. Ludo Bagman, Head of the 
Department of Magical Games and Sports.” 

There was a much louder round of applause for 
Bagman than for Crouch, perhaps because of his 
fame as a Beater, or simply because he looked so 
much more likable. He acknowledged it with a jovial 
wave of his hand. Bartemius Crouch did not smile or 
wave when his name was announced. Remembering 
him in his neat suit at the Quidditch World Cup, 
Harry thought he looked strange in wizard’s robes. 

His toothbrush mustache and severe parting looked 
very odd next to Dumbledore’s long white hair and 
beard. 

“Mr. Bagman and Mr. Crouch have worked tirelessly 
over the last few months on the arrangements for the 
Triwizard Tournament,” Dumbledore continued, “and 
they will be joining myself, Professor Karkaroff, and 
Madame Maxime on the panel that will judge the 
champions’ efforts.” 

At the mention of the word “champions,” the 
attentiveness of the listening students seemed to 
sharpen. Perhaps Dumbledore had noticed their 
sudden stillness, for he smiled as he said, “The 
casket, then, if you please, Mr. Filch.” 

Filch, who had been lurking unnoticed in a far corner 
of the Hall, now approached Dumbledore carrying a 
great wooden chest encrusted with jewels. It looked 
extremely old. A murmur of excited interest rose from 
the watching students; Dennis Creevey actually stood 
on his chair to see it properly, but, being so tiny, his 
head hardly rose above anyone else’s. 



Page | 282 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“The instructions for the tasks the champions will 
face this year have already been examined by Mr. 
Crouch and Mr. Bagman,” said Dumbledore as Filch 
placed the chest carefully on the table before him, 

“and they have made the necessary arrangements for 
each challenge. There will be three tasks, spaced 
throughout the school year, and they will test the 
champions in many different ways . . . their magical 
prowess — their daring — their powers of deduction 
— and, of course, their ability to cope with danger.” 

At this last word, the Hall was filled with a silence so 
absolute that nobody seemed to be breathing. 

“As you know, three champions compete in the 
tournament,” Dumbledore went on calmly, “one from 
each of the participating schools. They will be marked 
on how well they perform each of the Tournament 
tasks and the champion with the highest total after 
task three will win the Triwizard Cup. The champions 
will be chosen by an impartial selector: the Goblet of 
Fire.” 

Dumbledore now took out his wand and tapped three 
times upon the top of the casket. The lid creaked 
slowly open. Dumbledore reached inside it and pulled 
out a large, roughly hewn wooden cup. It would have 
been entirely unremarkable had it not been full to the 
brim with dancing blue-white flames. 

Dumbledore closed the casket and placed the goblet 
carefully on top of it, where it would be clearly visible 
to everyone in the Hall. 

“Anybody wishing to submit themselves as champion 
must write their name and school clearly upon a slip 
of parchment and drop it into the goblet,” said 
Dumbledore. “Aspiring champions have twenty-four 
hours in which to put their names forward. Tomorrow 
Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




night, Halloween, the goblet will return the names of 
the three it has judged most worthy to represent their 
schools. The goblet will be placed in the entrance hall 
tonight, where it will be freely accessible to all those 
wishing to compete. 

“To ensure that no underage student yields to 
temptation,” said Dumbledore, “I will be drawing an 
Age Line around the Goblet of Fire once it has been 
placed in the entrance hall. Nobody under the age of 
seventeen will be able to cross this line. 

“Finally, I wish to impress upon any of you wishing to 
compete that this tournament is not to be entered 
into lightly. Once a champion has been selected by 
the Goblet of Fire, he or she is obliged to see the 
tournament through to the end. The placing of your 
name in the goblet constitutes a binding, magical 
contract. There can be no change of heart once you 
have become a champion. Please be very sure, 
therefore, that you are wholeheartedly prepared to 
play before you drop your name into the goblet. Now, 

I think it is time for bed. Good night to you all.” 

“An Age Line!” Fred Weasley said, his eyes glinting, as 
they all made their way across the Hall to the doors 
into the entrance hall. “Well, that should be fooled by 
an Aging Potion, shouldn’t it? And once your name’s 
in that goblet, you’re laughing — it can’t tell whether 
you’re seventeen or not!” 

“But I don’t think anyone under seventeen will stand 
a chance,” said Hermione, “we just haven’t learned 
enough ...” 

“Speak for yourself,” said George shortly. “You’ll try 
and get in, won’t you, Harry?” 



Page | 284 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry thought briefly of Dumbledore ’s insistence that 
nobody under seventeen should submit their name, 
but then the wonderful picture of himself winning the 
Triwizard Tournament filled his mind again. ... He 
wondered how angry Dumbledore would be if 
someone younger than seventeen did find a way to get 
over the Age Line. ... 

“Where is he?” said Ron, who wasn’t listening to a 
word of this conversation, but looking through the 
crowd to see what had become of Krum. “Dumbledore 
didn’t say where the Durmstrang people are sleeping, 
did he?” 

But this query was answered almost instantly; they 
were level with the Slytherin table now, and Karkaroff 
had just bustled up to his students. 

“Back to the ship, then,” he was saying. “Viktor, how 
are you feeling? Did you eat enough? Should I send 
for some mulled wine from the kitchens?” 

Harry saw Krum shake his head as he pulled his furs 
back on. 

“Professor, I vood like some vine,” said one of the 
other Durmstrang boys hopefully. 

“I wasn’t offering it to you, Poliakoff,” snapped 
Karkaroff, his warmly paternal air vanishing in an 
instant. “I notice you have dribbled food all down the 
front of your robes again, disgusting boy — ” 

Karkaroff turned and led his students toward the 
doors, reaching them at exactly the same moment as 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione. Harry stopped to let him 
walk through first. 



Page | 285 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Thank you,” said Karkaroff carelessly, glancing at 
him. 

And then Karkaroff froze. He turned his head back to 
Harry and stared at him as though he couldn’t believe 
his eyes. Behind their headmaster, the students from 
Durmstrang came to a halt too. Karkaroff s eyes 
moved slowly up Harry’s face and fixed upon his scar. 
The Durmstrang students were staring curiously at 
Harry too. Out of the corner of his eye, Harry saw 
comprehension dawn on a few of their faces. The boy 
with food all down his front nudged the girl next to 
him and pointed openly at Harry’s forehead. 

“Yeah, that’s Harry Potter,” said a growling voice from 
behind them. 

Professor Karkaroff spun around. Mad-Eye Moody 
was standing there, leaning heavily on his staff, his 
magical eye glaring unblinkingly at the Durmstrang 
headmaster. 

The color drained from Karkaroff’s face as Harry 
watched. A terrible look of mingled fury and fear came 
over him. 

“You!” he said, staring at Moody as though unsure he 
was really seeing him. 

“Me,” said Moody grimly. “And unless you’ve got 
anything to say to Potter, Karkaroff, you might want 
to move. You’re blocking the doorway.” 

It was true; half the students in the Hall were now 
waiting behind them, looking over one another’s 
shoulders to see what was causing the holdup. 

Without another word, Professor Karkaroff swept his 
students away with him. Moody watched him until he 

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




was out of sight, his magical eye fixed upon his back, 
a look of intense dislike upon his mutilated face. 



As the next day was Saturday, most students would 
normally have breakfasted late. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione, however, were not alone in rising much 
earlier than they usually did on weekends. When they 
went down into the entrance hall, they saw about 
twenty people milling around it, some of them eating 
toast, all examining the Goblet of Fire. It had been 
placed in the center of the hall on the stool that 
normally bore the Sorting Hat. A thin golden line had 
been traced on the floor, forming a circle ten feet 
around it in every direction. 

“Anyone put their name in yet?” Ron asked a third- 
year girl eagerly. 

“All the Durmstrang lot,” she replied. “But I haven’t 
seen anyone from Hogwarts yet.” 

“Bet some of them put it in last night after we’d all 
gone to bed,” said Harry. “I would’ve if it had been me 
... wouldn’t have wanted everyone watching. What if 
the goblet just gobbed you right back out again?” 

Someone laughed behind Harry. Turning, he saw 
Fred, George, and Lee Jordan hurrying down the 
staircase, all three of them looking extremely excited. 

“Done it,” Fred said in a triumphant whisper to Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione. “Just taken it.” 

“What?” said Ron. 

“The Aging Potion, dung brains,” said Fred. 



Page | 287 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“One drop each,” said George, rubbing his hands 
together with glee. “We only need to be a few months 
older.” 



“We’re going to split the thousand Galleons between 
the three of us if one of us wins,” said Lee, grinning 
broadly. 

“I’m not sure this is going to work, you know,” said 
Hermione warningly “I’m sure Dumbledore will have 
thought of this.” 

Fred, George, and Lee ignored her. 

“Ready?” Fred said to the other two, quivering with 
excitement. “C’mon, then — I’ll go first — ” 

Harry watched, fascinated, as Fred pulled a slip of 
parchment out of his pocket bearing the words Fred 
Weasley — Hog warts. Fred walked right up to the 
edge of the line and stood there, rocking on his toes 
like a diver preparing for a fifty-foot drop. Then, with 
the eyes of every person in the entrance hall upon 
him, he took a great breath and stepped over the line. 

For a split second Harry thought it had worked — 
George certainly thought so, for he let out a yell of 
triumph and leapt after Fred — but next moment, 
there was a loud sizzling sound, and both twins were 
hurled out of the golden circle as though they had 
been thrown by an invisible shot-putter. They landed 
painfully, ten feet away on the cold stone floor, and to 
add insult to injury, there was a loud popping noise, 
and both of them sprouted identical long white 
beards. 

The entrance hall rang with laughter. Even Fred and 
George joined in, once they had gotten to their feet 
and taken a good look at each other’s beards. 

Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I did warn you,” said a deep, amused voice, and 
everyone turned to see Professor Dumbledore coming 
out of the Great Hall. He surveyed Fred and George, 
his eyes twinkling. “I suggest you both go up to 
Madam Pomfrey. She is already tending to Miss 
Fawcett, of Ravenclaw, and Mr. Summers, of 
Hufflepuff, both of whom decided to age themselves 
up a little too. Though I must say, neither of their 
beards is anything like as fine as yours.” 

Fred and George set off for the hospital wing, 
accompanied by Lee, who was howling with laughter, 
and Harry, Ron, and Hermione, also chortling, went 
in to breakfast. 

The decorations in the Great Hall had changed this 
morning. As it was Halloween, a cloud of live bats was 
fluttering around the enchanted ceiling, while 
hundreds of carved pumpkins leered from every 
corner. Harry led the way over to Dean and Seamus, 
who were discussing those Hogwarts students of 
seventeen or over who might be entering. 

“There’s a rumor going around that Warrington got up 
early and put his name in,” Dean told Harry. “That 
big bloke from Slytherin who looks like a sloth.” 

Harry, who had played Quidditch against Warrington, 
shook his head in disgust. 

“We can’t have a Slytherin champion!” 

“And all the Hufflepuffs are talking about Diggory,” 
said Seamus contemptuously. “But I wouldn’t have 
thought he’d have wanted to risk his good looks.” 

“Listen!” said Hermione suddenly. 



Page | 289 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




People were cheering out in the entrance hall. They all 
swiveled around in their seats and saw Angelina 
Johnson coming into the Hall, grinning in an 
embarrassed sort of way. A tall black girl who played 
Chaser on the Gryffindor Quidditch team, Angelina 
came over to them, sat down, and said, “Well, I’ve 
done it! Just put my name in!” 

“You’re kidding!” said Ron, looking impressed. 

“Are you seventeen, then?” asked Harry. 

“ ’Course she is, can’t see a beard, can you?” said 
Ron. 

“I had my birthday last week,” said Angelina. 

“Well, I’m glad someone from Gryffindor’s entering,” 
said Hermione. “I really hope you get it, Angelina!” 

“Thanks, Hermione,” said Angelina, smiling at her. 

“Yeah, better you than Pretty-Boy Diggory,” said 
Seamus, causing several Hufflepuffs passing their 
table to scowl heavily at him. 

“What’re we going to do today, then?” Ron asked 
Harry and Hermione when they had finished 
breakfast and were leaving the Great Hall. 

“We haven’t been down to visit Hagrid yet,” said 
Harry. 

“Okay,” said Ron, “just as long as he doesn’t ask us to 
donate a few fingers to the skrewts.” 

A look of great excitement suddenly dawned on 
Hermione ’s face. 



Page | 290 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ve just realized — I haven’t asked Hagrid to join 
S.P.E.W. yet!” she said brightly. “Wait for me, will 
you, while I nip upstairs and get the badges?” 

“What is it with her?” said Ron, exasperated, as 
Hermione ran away up the marble staircase. 

“Hey, Ron,” said Harry suddenly. “It’s your friend ...” 

The students from Beauxbatons were coming through 
the front doors from the grounds, among them, the 
veela-girl. Those gathered around the Goblet of Fire 
stood back to let them pass, watching eagerly. 

Madame Maxime entered the hall behind her students 
and organized them into a line. One by one, the 
Beauxbatons students stepped across the Age Line 
and dropped their slips of parchment into the blue- 
white flames. As each name entered the fire, it turned 
briefly red and emitted sparks. 

“What d’you reckon’ll happen to the ones who aren’t 
chosen?” Ron muttered to Harry as the veela-girl 
dropped her parchment into the Goblet of Fire. 
“Reckon they’ll go back to school, or hang around to 
watch the tournament?” 

“Dunno,” said Harry. “Hang around, I suppose. ... 
Madame Maxime’s staying to judge, isn’t she?” 

When all the Beauxbatons students had submitted 
their names, Madame Maxime led them back out of 
the hall and out onto the grounds again. 

“Where are they sleeping, then?” said Ron, moving 
toward the front doors and staring after them. 



Page | 291 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A loud rattling noise behind them announced 
Hermione’s reappearance with the box of S.P.E.W. 
badges. 

“Oh good, hurry up,” said Ron, and he jumped down 
the stone steps, keeping his eyes on the back of the 
veela-girl, who was now halfway across the lawn with 
Madame Maxime. 

As they neared Hagrid’s cabin on the edge of the 
Forbidden Forest, the mystery of the Beauxbatons’ 
sleeping quarters was solved. The gigantic powder- 
blue carriage in which they had arrived had been 
parked two hundred yards from Hagrid’s front door, 
and the students were climbing back inside it. The 
elephantine flying horses that had pulled the carriage 
were now grazing in a makeshift paddock alongside it. 

Harry knocked on Hagrid’s door, and Fang’s booming 
barks answered instantly 

“ ’Bout time!” said Hagrid, when he’d flung open the 
door. “Thought you lot’d forgotten where I live!” 

“We’ve been really busy, Hag — ” Hermione started to 
say, but then she stopped dead, looking up at Hagrid, 
apparently lost for words. 

Hagrid was wearing his best (and very horrible) hairy 
brown suit, plus a checked yellow-and-orange tie. 

This wasn’t the worst of it, though; he had evidently 
tried to tame his hair, using large quantities of what 
appeared to be axle grease. It was now slicked down 
into two bunches — perhaps he had tried a ponytail 
like Bill’s, but found he had too much hair. The look 
didn’t really suit Hagrid at all. For a moment, 
Hermione goggled at him, then, obviously deciding 
not to comment, she said, “Erm — where are the 
skrewts?” 

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Out by the pumpkin patch,” said Hagrid happily. 
“They’re gettin’ massive, mus’ be nearly three foot 
long now. On’y trouble is, they’ve started killin’ each 
other.” 

“Oh no, really?” said Hermione, shooting a repressive 
look at Ron, who, staring at Hagrid’s odd hairstyle, 
had just opened his mouth to say something about it. 

“Yeah,” said Hagrid sadly. “ ’S’ okay, though, I’ve got 
’em in separate boxes now. Still got abou’ twenty.” 

“Well, that’s lucky,” said Ron. Hagrid missed the 
sarcasm. 

Hagrid’s cabin comprised a single room, in one corner 
of which was a gigantic bed covered in a patchwork 
quilt. A similarly enormous wooden table and chairs 
stood in front of the fire beneath the quantity of cured 
hams and dead birds hanging from the ceiling. They 
sat down at the table while Hagrid started to make 
tea, and were soon immersed in yet more discussion 
of the Triwizard Tournament. Hagrid seemed quite as 
excited about it as they were. 

“You wait,” he said, grinning. “You jus’ wait. Yer going 
ter see some stuff yeh’ve never seen before. Firs’ task 
... ah, but I’m not supposed ter say.” 

“Go on, Hagrid!” Harry, Ron, and Hermione urged 
him, but he just shook his head, grinning. 

“I don’ want ter spoil it fer yeh,” said Hagrid. “But it’s 
gonna be spectacular, I’ll tell yeh that. Them 
champions ’re going ter have their work cut out. Never 
thought I’d live ter see the Triwizard Tournament 
played again!” 



Page | 293 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They ended up having lunch with Hagrid, though they 
didn’t eat much — Hagrid had made what he said was 
a beef casserole, but after Hermione unearthed a 
large talon in hers, she, Harry, and Ron rather lost 
their appetites. However, they enjoyed themselves 
trying to make Hagrid tell them what the tasks in the 
tournament were going to be, speculating which of 
the entrants were likely to be selected as champions, 
and wondering whether Fred and George were 
beardless yet. 

A light rain had started to fall by midafternoon; it was 
very cozy sitting by the fire, listening to the gentle 
patter of the drops on the window, watching Hagrid 
darning his socks and arguing with Hermione about 
house-elves — for he flatly refused to join S.P.E.W. 
when she showed him her badges. 

“It’d be doin’ ’em an unkindness, Hermione,” he said 
gravely, threading a massive bone needle with thick 
yellow yarn. “It’s in their nature ter look after 
humans, that’s what they like, see? Yeh’d be makin’ 
’em unhappy ter take away their work, an’ insultin’ 
’em if yeh tried ter pay ’em.” 

“But Harry set Dobby free, and he was over the moon 
about it!” said Hermione. “And we heard he’s asking 
for wages now!” 

“Yeah, well, yeh get weirdos in every breed. I’m not 
sayin’ there isn’t the odd elf who’d take freedom, but 
yeh’ll never persuade most of ’em ter do it — no, 
nothin’ doin’, Hermione.” 

Hermione looked very cross indeed and stuffed her 
box of badges back into her cloak pocket. 

By half past five it was growing dark, and Ron, Harry, 
and Hermione decided it was time to get back up to 

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the castle for the Halloween feast — and, more 
important, the announcement of the school 
champions. 

“I’ll come with yeh,” said Hagrid, putting away his 
darning. “Jus’ give us a sec.” 

Hagrid got up, went across to the chest of drawers 
beside his bed, and began searching for something 
inside it. They didn’t pay too much attention until a 
truly horrible smell reached their nostrils. Coughing, 
Ron said, “Hagrid, what’s that?” 

“Eh?” said Hagrid, turning around with a large bottle 
in his hand. “Don’ yeh like it?” 

“Is that aftershave?” said Hermione in a slightly 
choked voice. 

“Er — eau de cologne,” Hagrid muttered. He was 
blushing. “Maybe it’s a bit much,” he said gruffly. “I’ll 
go take it off, hang on . . . 

He stumped out of the cabin, and they saw him 
washing himself vigorously in the water barrel outside 
the window. 

“Eau de cologne?” said Hermione in amazement. 
“Hagrid?” 

“And what’s with the hair and the suit?” said Harry in 
an undertone. 

“Look!” said Ron suddenly, pointing out of the 
window. 

Hagrid had just straightened up and turned ’round. If 
he had been blushing before, it was nothing to what 
he was doing now. Getting to their feet very 

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




cautiously, so that Hagrid wouldn’t spot them, Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione peered through the window and 
saw that Madame Maxime and the Beauxbatons 
students had just emerged from their carriage, clearly 
about to set off for the feast too. They couldn’t hear 
what Hagrid was saying, but he was talking to 
Madame Maxime with a rapt, misty-eyed expression 
Harry had only ever seen him wear once before — 
when he had been looking at the baby dragon, 

Norbert. 

“He’s going up to the castle with her!” said Hermione 
indignantly. “I thought he was waiting for us!” 

Without so much as a backward glance at his cabin, 
Hagrid was trudging off up the grounds with Madame 
Maxime, the Beauxbatons students following in their 
wake, jogging to keep up with their enormous strides. 

“He fancies her!” said Ron incredulously. “Well, if they 
end up having children, they’ll be setting a world 
record — bet any baby of theirs would weigh about a 
ton.” 

They let themselves out of the cabin and shut the 
door behind them. It was surprisingly dark outside. 
Drawing their cloaks more closely around themselves, 
they set off up the sloping lawns. 

“Ooh it’s them, look!” Hermione whispered. 

The Durmstrang party was walking up toward the 
castle from the lake. Viktor Krum was walking side by 
side with Karkaroff, and the other Durmstrang 
students were straggling along behind them. Ron 
watched Krum excitedly, but Krum did not look 
around as he reached the front doors a little ahead of 
Hermione, Ron, and Harry and proceeded through 
them. 

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




When they entered the candlelit Great Hall it was 
almost full. The Goblet of Fire had been moved; it was 
now standing in front of Dumbledore ’s empty chair at 
the teachers’ table. Fred and George — clean-shaven 
again — seemed to have taken their disappointment 
fairly well. 

“Hope it’s Angelina,” said Fred as Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione sat down. 

“So do I!” said Hermione breathlessly. “Well, we’ll 
soon know!” 

The Halloween feast seemed to take much longer than 
usual. Perhaps because it was their second feast in 
two days, Harry didn’t seem to fancy the 
extravagantly prepared food as much as he would 
have normally. Like everyone else in the Hall, judging 
by the constantly craning necks, the impatient 
expressions on every face, the fidgeting, and the 
standing up to see whether Dumbledore had finished 
eating yet, Harry simply wanted the plates to clear, 
and to hear who had been selected as champions. 

At long last, the golden plates returned to their 
original spotless state; there was a sharp upswing in 
the level of noise within the Hall, which died away 
almost instantly as Dumbledore got to his feet. On 
either side of him, Professor Karkaroff and Madame 
Maxime looked as tense and expectant as anyone. 
Ludo Bagman was beaming and winking at various 
students. Mr. Crouch, however, looked quite 
uninterested, almost bored. 

“Well, the goblet is almost ready to make its decision,” 
said Dumbledore. “I estimate that it requires one 
more minute. Now, when the champions’ names are 
called, I would ask them please to come up to the top 
of the Hall, walk along the staff table, and go through 
Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




into the next chamber” — he indicated the door 
behind the staff table — “where they will be receiving 
their first instructions.” 

He took out his wand and gave a great sweeping wave 
with it; at once, all the candles except those inside the 
carved pumpkins were extinguished, plunging them 
into a state of semidarkness. The Goblet of Fire now 
shone more brightly than anything in the whole Hall, 
the sparkling bright, bluey-whiteness of the flames 
almost painful on the eyes. Everyone watched, 
waiting. ... A few people kept checking their watches. 



“Any second,” Lee Jordan whispered, two seats away 
from Harry. 

The flames inside the goblet turned suddenly red 
again. Sparks began to fly from it. Next moment, a 
tongue of flame shot into the air, a charred piece of 
parchment fluttered out of it — the whole room 
gasped. 

Dumbledore caught the piece of parchment and held 
it at arm’s length, so that he could read it by the light 
of the flames, which had turned back to blue-white. 

“The champion for Durmstrang,” he read, in a strong, 
clear voice, “will be Viktor Krum.” 

“No surprises there!” yelled Ron as a storm of 
applause and cheering swept the Hall. Harry saw 
Viktor Krum rise from the Slytherin table and slouch 
up toward Dumbledore; he turned right, walked along 
the staff table, and disappeared through the door into 
the next chamber. 



Page | 298 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Bravo, Viktor!” boomed Karkaroff, so loudly that 
everyone could hear him, even over all the applause. 
“Knew you had it in you!” 

The clapping and chatting died down. Now everyone’s 
attention was focused again on the goblet, which, 
seconds later, turned red once more. A second piece 
of parchment shot out of it, propelled by the flames. 

“The champion for Beauxbatons,” said Dumbledore, 

“is Fleur Delacour!” 

“It’s her, Ron!” Harry shouted as the girl who so 
resembled a veela got gracefully to her feet, shook 
back her sheet of silvery blonde hair, and swept up 
between the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables. 

“Oh look, they’re all disappointed,” Hermione said 
over the noise, nodding toward the remainder of the 
Beauxbatons party. “Disappointed” was a bit of an 
understatement, Harry thought. Two of the girls who 
had not been selected had dissolved into tears and 
were sobbing with their heads on their arms. 

When Fleur Delacour too had vanished into the side 
chamber, silence fell again, but this time it was a 
silence so stiff with excitement you could almost taste 
it. The Hogwarts champion next ... 

And the Goblet of Fire turned red once more; sparks 
showered out of it; the tongue of flame shot high into 
the air, and from its tip Dumbledore pulled the third 
piece of parchment. 

“The Hogwarts champion,” he called, “is Cedric 
Diggory!” 

“No!” said Ron loudly, but nobody heard him except 
Harry; the uproar from the next table was too great. 

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Every single Hufflepuff had jumped to his or her feet, 
screaming and stamping, as Cedric made his way 
past them, grinning broadly, and headed off toward 
the chamber behind the teachers’ table. Indeed, the 
applause for Cedric went on so long that it was some 
time before Dumbledore could make himself heard 
again. 

“Excellent!” Dumbledore called happily as at last the 
tumult died down. “Well, we now have our three 
champions. I am sure I can count upon all of you, 
including the remaining students from Beauxbatons 
and Durmstrang, to give your champions every ounce 
of support you can muster. By cheering your 
champion on, you will contribute in a very real — ” 

But Dumbledore suddenly stopped speaking, and it 
was apparent to everybody what had distracted him. 

The fire in the goblet had just turned red again. 
Sparks were flying out of it. A long flame shot 
suddenly into the air, and borne upon it was another 
piece of parchment. 

Automatically, it seemed, Dumbledore reached out a 
long hand and seized the parchment. He held it out 
and stared at the name written upon it. There was a 
long pause, during which Dumbledore stared at the 
slip in his hands, and everyone in the room stared at 
Dumbledore. And then Dumbledore cleared his throat 
and read out — 

“ Harry Potter.” 



Page | 300 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 





THE FOUR CHAMPIONS 

Harry sat there, aware that every head in the Great 
Hall had turned to look at him. He was stunned. He 
felt numb. He was surely dreaming. He had not heard 
correctly. 

There was no applause. A buzzing, as though of angry 
bees, was starting to fill the Hall; some students were 
standing up to get a better look at Harry as he sat, 
frozen, in his seat. 

Up at the top table, Professor McGonagall had got to 
her feet and swept past Ludo Bagman and Professor 
Karkaroff to whisper urgently to Professor 
Dumbledore, who bent his ear toward her, frowning 
slightly. 

Harry turned to Ron and Hermione; beyond them, he 
saw the long Gryffindor table all watching him, 
openmouthed. 

“I didn’t put my name in,” Harry said blankly. “You 
know I didn’t.” 

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Both of them stared just as blankly back. 

At the top table, Professor Dumbledore had 
straightened up, nodding to Professor McGonagall. 

“Harry Potter!” he called again. “Harry! Up here, if you 
please!” 

“Go on,” Hermione whispered, giving Harry a slight 
push. 

Harry got to his feet, trod on the hem of his robes, 
and stumbled slightly. He set off up the gap between 
the Gryffindor and Hufflepuff tables. It felt like an 
immensely long walk; the top table didn’t seem to be 
getting any nearer at all, and he could feel hundreds 
and hundreds of eyes upon him, as though each were 
a searchlight. The buzzing grew louder and louder. 
After what seemed like an hour, he was right in front 
of Dumbledore, feeling the stares of all the teachers 
upon him. 

“Well ... through the door, Harry,” said Dumbledore. 
He wasn’t smiling. 

Harry moved off along the teachers’ table. Hagrid was 
seated right at the end. He did not wink at Harry, or 
wave, or give any of his usual signs of greeting. He 
looked completely astonished and stared at Harry as 
he passed like everyone else. Harry went through the 
door out of the Great Hall and found himself in a 
smaller room, lined with paintings of witches and 
wizards. A handsome fire was roaring in the fireplace 
opposite him. 

The faces in the portraits turned to look at him as he 
entered. He saw a wizened witch flit out of the frame 
of her picture and into the one next to it, which 



Page | 302 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




contained a wizard with a walrus mustache. The 
wizened witch started whispering in his ear. 

Viktor Krum, Cedric Diggory, and Fleur Delacour 
were grouped around the fire. They looked strangely 
impressive, silhouetted against the flames. Krum, 
hunched-up and brooding, was leaning against the 
mantelpiece, slightly apart from the other two. Cedric 
was standing with his hands behind his back, staring 
into the fire. Fleur Delacour looked around when 
Harry walked in and threw back her sheet of long, 
silvery hair. 

“What is it?” she said. “Do zey want us back in ze 
Hall?” 

She thought he had come to deliver a message. Harry 
didn’t know how to explain what had just happened. 
He just stood there, looking at the three champions. It 
struck him how very tall all of them were. 

There was a sound of scurrying feet behind him, and 
Ludo Bagman entered the room. He took Harry by the 
arm and led him forward. 

“Extraordinary!” he muttered, squeezing Harry’s arm. 
“Absolutely extraordinary! Gentlemen ... lady,” he 
added, approaching the fireside and addressing the 
other three. “May I introduce — incredible though it 
may seem — the fourth Triwizard champion?” 

Viktor Krum straightened up. His surly face darkened 
as he surveyed Harry. Cedric looked nonplussed. He 
looked from Bagman to Harry and back again as 
though sure he must have misheard what Bagman 
had said. Fleur Delacour, however, tossed her hair, 
smiling, and said, “Oh, vairy funny joke, Meester 
Bagman.” 



Page | 303 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Joke?” Bagman repeated, bewildered. “No, no, not at 
all! Harry’s name just came out of the Goblet of Fire!” 

Krum’s thick eyebrows contracted slightly. Cedric was 
still looking politely bewildered. Fleur frowned. 

“But evidently zair ’as been a mistake,” she said 
contemptuously to Bagman. “ ’E cannot compete. ’E is 
too young.” 

“Well ... it is amazing,” said Bagman, rubbing his 
smooth chin and smiling down at Harry. “But, as you 
know, the age restriction was only imposed this year 
as an extra safety measure. And as his name’s come 
out of the goblet ... I mean, I don’t think there can be 
any ducking out at this stage. ... It’s down in the 
rules, you’re obliged ... Harry will just have to do the 
best he — ” 

The door behind them opened again, and a large 
group of people came in: Professor Dumbledore, 
followed closely by Mr. Crouch, Professor Karkaroff, 
Madame Maxime, Professor McGonagall, and 
Professor Snape. Harry heard the buzzing of the 
hundreds of students on the other side of the wall, 
before Professor McGonagall closed the door. 

“Madame Maxime!” said Fleur at once, striding over to 
her headmistress. “Zey are saying zat zis little boy is 
to compete also!” 

Somewhere under Harry’s numb disbelief he felt a 
ripple of anger. Little boy ? 

Madame Maxime had drawn herself up to her full, 
and considerable, height. The top of her handsome 
head brushed the candle-filled chandelier, and her 
gigantic black-satin bosom swelled. 



Page | 304 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What is ze meaning of zis, Dumbly-dorr?” she said 
imperiously. 

“I’d rather like to know that myself, Dumbledore,” 
said Professor Karkaroff. He was wearing a steely 
smile, and his blue eyes were like chips of ice. “Two 
Hogwarts champions? I don’t remember anyone 
telling me the host school is allowed two champions 
— or have I not read the rules carefully enough?” 

He gave a short and nasty laugh. 

“C’est impossible,” said Madame Maxime, whose 
enormous hand with its many superb opals was 
resting upon Fleur’s shoulder. “ ’Ogwarts cannot ’ave 
two champions. It is most injust.” 

“We were under the impression that your Age Line 
would keep out younger contestants, Dumbledore,” 
said Karkaroff, his steely smile still in place, though 
his eyes were colder than ever. “Otherwise, we would, 
of course, have brought along a wider selection of 
candidates from our own schools.” 

“It’s no one’s fault but Potter’s, Karkaroff,” said Snape 
softly. His black eyes were alight with malice. “Don’t 
go blaming Dumbledore for Potter’s determination to 
break rules. He has been crossing lines ever since he 
arrived here — ” 

“Thank you, Severus,” said Dumbledore firmly, and 
Snape went quiet, though his eyes still glinted 
malevolently through his curtain of greasy black hair. 

Professor Dumbledore was now looking down at 
Harry, who looked right back at him, trying to discern 
the expression of the eyes behind the half-moon 
spectacles. 



Page | 305 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Did you put your name into the Goblet of Fire, 
Harry?” he asked calmly. 

“No,” said Harry. He was very aware of everybody 
watching him closely. Snape made a soft noise of 
impatient disbelief in the shadows. 

“Did you ask an older student to put it into the Goblet 
of Fire for you?” said Professor Dumbledore, ignoring 
Snape. 

“No,” said Harry vehemently. 

“Ah, but of course ’e is lying!” cried Madame Maxime. 
Snape was now shaking his head, his lip curling. 

“He could not have crossed the Age Line,” said 
Professor McGonagall sharply. “I am sure we are all 
agreed on that — ” 

“Dumbly-dorr must ’ave made a mistake wiz ze line,” 
said Madame Maxime, shrugging. 

“It is possible, of course,” said Dumbledore politely 

“Dumbledore, you know perfectly well you did not 
make a mistake!” said Professor McGonagall angrily. 
“Really, what nonsense! Harry could not have crossed 
the line himself, and as Professor Dumbledore 
believes that he did not persuade an older student to 
do it for him, I’m sure that should be good enough for 
everybody else!” 

She shot a very angry look at Professor Snape. 

“Mr. Crouch ... Mr. Bagman,” said Karkaroff, his voice 
unctuous once more, “you are our — er — objective 
judges. Surely you will agree that this is most 
irregular?” 

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Bagman wiped his round, boyish face with his 
handkerchief and looked at Mr. Crouch, who was 
standing outside the circle of the firelight, his face 
half hidden in shadow. He looked slightly eerie, the 
half darkness making him look much older, giving 
him an almost skull-like appearance. When he spoke, 
however, it was in his usual curt voice. 

“We must follow the rules, and the rules state clearly 
that those people whose names come out of the 
Goblet of Fire are bound to compete in the 
tournament.” 

“Well, Barty knows the rule book back to front,” said 
Bagman, beaming and turning back to Karkaroff and 
Madame Maxime, as though the matter was now 
closed. 

“I insist upon resubmitting the names of the rest of 
my students,” said Karkaroff. He had dropped his 
unctuous tone and his smile now. His face wore a 
very ugly look indeed. “You will set up the Goblet of 
Fire once more, and we will continue adding names 
until each school has two champions. It’s only fair, 
Dumbledore.” 

“But Karkaroff, it doesn’t work like that,” said 
Bagman. “The Goblet of Fire’s just gone out — it won’t 
reignite until the start of the next tournament — ” 

“ — in which Durmstrang will most certainly not be 
competing!” exploded Karkaroff. “After all our 
meetings and negotiations and compromises, I little 
expected something of this nature to occur! I have 
half a mind to leave now!” 

“Empty threat, Karkaroff,” growled a voice from near 
the door. “You can’t leave your champion now. He’s 
got to compete. They’ve all got to compete. Binding 

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




magical contract, like Dumbledore said. Convenient, 
eh?” 



Moody had just entered the room. He limped toward 
the fire, and with every right step he took, there was a 
loud clunk. 

“Convenient?” said Karkaroff. “I’m afraid I don’t 
understand you, Moody.” 

Harry could tell he was trying to sound disdainful, as 
though what Moody was saying was barely worth his 
notice, but his hands gave him away; they had balled 
themselves into fists. 

“Don’t you?” said Moody quietly. “It’s very simple, 
Karkaroff. Someone put Potter’s name in that goblet 
knowing he’d have to compete if it came out.” 

“Evidently, someone ’oo wished to give ’Ogwarts two 
bites at ze apple!” said Madame Maxime. 

“I quite agree, Madame Maxime,” said Karkaroff, 
bowing to her. “I shall be lodging complaints with the 
Ministry of Magic and the International Confederation 
of Wizards — ” 

“If anyone’s got reason to complain, it’s Potter,” 
growled Moody, “but ... funny thing ... I don’t hear 
him saying a word. ...” 

“Why should ’e complain?” burst out Fleur Delacour, 
stamping her foot. “ ’E ’as ze chance to compete, ’asn’t 
’e? We ’ave all been ’oping to be chosen for weeks and 
weeks! Ze honor for our schools! A thousand Galleons 
in prize money — zis is a chance many would die for!” 

“Maybe someone’s hoping Potter is going to die for it,” 
said Moody, with the merest trace of a growl. 

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




An extremely tense silence followed these words. Ludo 
Bagman, who was looking very anxious indeed, 
bounced nervously up and down on his feet and said, 
“Moody, old man ... what a thing to say!” 

“We all know Professor Moody considers the morning 
wasted if he hasn’t discovered six plots to murder him 
before lunchtime,” said Karkaroff loudly. “Apparently 
he is now teaching his students to fear assassination 
too. An odd quality in a Defense Against the Dark 
Arts teacher, Dumbledore, but no doubt you had your 
reasons.” 

“Imagining things, am I?” growled Moody. “Seeing 
things, eh? It was a skilled witch or wizard who put 
the boy’s name in that goblet. ...” 

“Ah, what evidence is zere of zat?” said Madame 
Maxime, throwing up her huge hands. 

“Because they hoodwinked a very powerful magical 
object!” said Moody. “It would have needed an 
exceptionally strong Confundus Charm to bamboozle 
that goblet into forgetting that only three schools 
compete in the tournament. ... I’m guessing they 
submitted Potter’s name under a fourth school, to 
make sure he was the only one in his category. ...” 

“You seem to have given this a great deal of thought, 
Moody,” said Karkaroff coldly, “and a very ingenious 
theory it is — though of course, I heard you recently 
got it into your head that one of your birthday 
presents contained a cunningly disguised basilisk 
egg, and smashed it to pieces before realizing it was a 
carriage clock. So you’ll understand if we don’t take 
you entirely seriously. ...” 

“There are those who’ll turn innocent occasions to 
their advantage,” Moody retorted in a menacing voice. 

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s my job to think the way Dark wizards do, 
Karkaroff — as you ought to remember. ...” 

“Alas tor!” said Dumbledore warningly. Harry 
wondered for a moment whom he was speaking to, 
but then realized “Mad-Eye” could hardly be Moody’s 
real first name. Moody fell silent, though still 
surveying Karkaroff with satisfaction — Karkaroff’s 
face was burning. 

“How this situation arose, we do not know,” said 
Dumbledore, speaking to everyone gathered in the 
room. “It seems to me, however, that we have no 
choice but to accept it. Both Cedric and Harry have 
been chosen to compete in the Tournament. This, 
therefore, they will do. ...” 

“Ah, but Dumbly-dorr — ” 

“My dear Madame Maxime, if you have an alternative, 

I would be delighted to hear it.” 

Dumbledore waited, but Madame Maxime did not 
speak, she merely glared. She wasn’t the only one 
either. Snape looked furious; Karkaroff livid; Bagman, 
however, looked rather excited. 

“Well, shall we crack on, then?” he said, rubbing his 
hands together and smiling around the room. “Got to 
give our champions their instructions, haven’t we? 
Barty, want to do the honors?” 

Mr. Crouch seemed to come out of a deep reverie. 

“Yes,” he said, “instructions. Yes ... the first task ...” 

He moved forward into the firelight. Close up, Harry 
thought he looked ill. There were dark shadows 
beneath his eyes and a thin, papery look about his 

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




wrinkled skin that had not been there at the 
Quidditch World Cup. 

“The first task is designed to test your daring,” he told 
Harry, Cedric, Fleur, and Viktor, “so we are not going 
to be telling you what it is. Courage in the face of the 
unknown is an important quality in a wizard . . . very 
important. ... 

“The first task will take place on November the 
twenty-fourth, in front of the other students and the 
panel of judges. 

“The champions are not permitted to ask for or accept 
help of any kind from their teachers to complete the 
tasks in the tournament. The champions will face the 
first challenge armed only with their wands. They will 
receive information about the second task when the 
first is over. Owing to the demanding and time- 
consuming nature of the tournament, the champions 
are exempted from end-of-year tests.” 

Mr. Crouch turned to look at Dumbledore. 

“I think that’s all, is it, Albus?” 

“I think so,” said Dumbledore, who was looking at Mr. 
Crouch with mild concern. “Are you sure you 
wouldn’t like to stay at Hogwarts tonight, Barty?” 

“No, Dumbledore, I must get back to the Ministry,” 
said Mr. Crouch. “It is a very busy, very difficult time 
at the moment. ... I’ve left young Weatherby in 
charge. ... Very enthusiastic ... a little 
overenthusiastic, if truth be told. ...” 

“You’ll come and have a drink before you go, at 
least?” said Dumbledore. 



Page | 311 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, Barty, I’m staying!” said Bagman brightly. 
“It’s all happening at Hogwarts now, you know, much 
more exciting here than at the office!” 

“I think not, Ludo,” said Crouch with a touch of his 
old impatience. 

“Professor Karkaroff — Madame Maxime — a 
nightcap?” said Dumbledore. 

But Madame Maxime had already put her arm 
around Fleur’s shoulders and was leading her swiftly 
out of the room. Harry could hear them both talking 
very fast in French as they went off into the Great 
Hall. Karkaroff beckoned to Krum, and they, too, 
exited, though in silence. 

“Harry, Cedric, I suggest you go up to bed,” said 
Dumbledore, smiling at both of them. “I am sure 
Gryffindor and Hufflepuff are waiting to celebrate with 
you, and it would be a shame to deprive them of this 
excellent excuse to make a great deal of mess and 
noise.” 

Harry glanced at Cedric, who nodded, and they left 
together. 

The Great Hall was deserted now; the candles had 
burned low, giving the jagged smiles of the pumpkins 
an eerie, flickering quality. 

“So,” said Cedric, with a slight smile. “We’re playing 
against each other again!” 

“I s’pose,” said Harry. He really couldn’t think of 
anything to say. The inside of his head seemed to be 
in complete disarray, as though his brain had been 
ransacked. 



Page | 312 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“So ... tell me ...” said Cedric as they reached the 
entrance hall, which was now lit only by torches in 
the absence of the Goblet of Fire. “How did you get 
your name in?” 

“I didn’t,” said Harry, staring up at him. “I didn’t put 
it in. I was telling the truth.” 

“Ah ... okay,” said Cedric. Harry could tell Cedric 
didn’t believe him. “Well ... see you, then.” 

Instead of going up the marble staircase, Cedric 
headed for a door to its right. Harry stood listening to 
him going down the stone steps beyond it, then, 
slowly, he started to climb the marble ones. 

Was anyone except Ron and Hermione going to 
believe him, or would they all think he’d put himself 
in for the tournament? Yet how could anyone think 
that, when he was facing competitors who’d had three 
years’ more magical education than he had — when 
he was now facing tasks that not only sounded very 
dangerous, but which were to be performed in front of 
hundreds of people? Yes, he’d thought about it ... he’d 
fantasized about it ... but it had been a joke, really, 
an idle sort of dream ... he’d never really, seriously 
considered entering. ... 

But someone else had considered it ... someone else 
had wanted him in the tournament, and had made 
sure he was entered. Why? To give him a treat? He 
didn’t think so, somehow. ... 

To see him make a fool of himself? Well, they were 
likely to get their wish. ... 

But to get him killed? 



Page | 313 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Was Moody just being his usual paranoid self? 
Couldn’t someone have put Harry’s name in the 
goblet as a trick, a practical joke? Did anyone really 
want him dead? 

Harry was able to answer that at once. Yes, someone 
wanted him dead, someone had wanted him dead 
ever since he had been a year old ... Lord Voldemort. 
But how could Voldemort have ensured that Harry’s 
name got into the Goblet of Fire? Voldemort was 
supposed to be far away, in some distant country, in 
hiding, alone ... feeble and powerless. ... 

Yet in that dream he had had, just before he had 
awoken with his scar hurting, Voldemort had not 
been alone ... he had been talking to Wormtail ... 
plotting Harry’s murder. . . . 

Harry got a shock to find himself facing the Fat Lady 
already. He had barely noticed where his feet were 
carrying him. It was also a surprise to see that she 
was not alone in her frame. The wizened witch who 
had flitted into her neighbor’s painting when he had 
joined the champions downstairs was now sitting 
smugly beside the Fat Lady. She must have dashed 
through every picture lining seven staircases to reach 
here before him. Both she and the Fat Lady were 
looking down at him with the keenest interest. 

“Well, well, well,” said the Fat Lady, “Violet’s just told 
me everything. Who’s just been chosen as school 
champion, then?” 

“Balderdash,” said Harry dully. 

“It most certainly isn’t!” said the pale witch 
indignantly. 



Page | 314 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No, no, Vi, it’s the password,” said the Fat Lady 
soothingly, and she swung forward on her hinges to 
let Harry into the common room. 

The blast of noise that met Harry’s ears when the 
portrait opened almost knocked him backward. Next 
thing he knew, he was being wrenched inside the 
common room by about a dozen pairs of hands, and 
was facing the whole of Gryffindor House, all of whom 
were screaming, applauding, and whistling. 

“You should’ve told us you’d entered!” bellowed Fred; 
he looked half annoyed, half deeply impressed. 

“How did you do it without getting a beard? Brilliant!” 
roared George. 

“I didn’t,” Harry said. “I don’t know how — ” 

But Angelina had now swooped down upon him; “Oh 
if it couldn’t be me, at least it’s a Gryffindor — ” 

“You’ll be able to pay back Diggory for that last 
Quidditch match, Harry!” shrieked Katie Bell, another 
of the Gryffindor Chasers. 

“We’ve got food, Harry, come and have some — ” 

“I’m not hungry, I had enough at the feast — ” 

But nobody wanted to hear that he wasn’t hungry; 
nobody wanted to hear that he hadn’t put his name in 
the goblet; not one single person seemed to have 
noticed that he wasn’t at all in the mood to celebrate. 
... Lee Jordan had unearthed a Gryffindor banner 
from somewhere, and he insisted on draping it 
around Harry like a cloak. Harry couldn’t get away; 
whenever he tried to sidle over to the staircase up to 
the dormitories, the crowd around him closed ranks, 
Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




forcing another butterbeer on him, stuffing crisps and 
peanuts into his hands. ... Everyone wanted to know 
how he had done it, how he had tricked Dumbledore’s 
Age Line and managed to get his name into the 
goblet. ... 

“I didn’t,” he said, over and over again, “I don’t know 
how it happened.” 

But for all the notice anyone took, he might just as 
well not have answered at all. 

“I’m tired!” he bellowed finally, after nearly half an 
hour. “No, seriously, George — I’m going to bed — ” 

He wanted more than anything to find Ron and 
Hermione, to find a bit of sanity, but neither of them 
seemed to be in the common room. Insisting that he 
needed to sleep, and almost flattening the little 
Creevey brothers as they attempted to waylay him at 
the foot of the stairs, Harry managed to shake 
everyone off and climb up to the dormitory as fast as 
he could. 

To his great relief, he found Ron was lying on his bed 
in the otherwise empty dormitory, still fully dressed. 
He looked up when Harry slammed the door behind 
him. 

“Where ’ve you been?” Harry said. 

“Oh hello,” said Ron. 

He was grinning, but it was a very odd, strained sort 
of grin. Harry suddenly became aware that he was 
still wearing the scarlet Gryffindor banner that Lee 
had tied around him. He hastened to take it off, but it 
was knotted very tightly. Ron lay on the bed without 
moving, watching Harry struggle to remove it. 

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




“So,” he said, when Harry had finally removed the 
banner and thrown it into a corner. 

“Congratulations . ” 

“What d’you mean, congratulations?” said Harry, 
staring at Ron. There was definitely something wrong 
with the way Ron was smiling: It was more like a 
grimace. 

“Well ... no one else got across the Age Line,” said 
Ron. “Not even Fred and George. What did you use — 
the Invisibility Cloak?” 

“The Invisibility Cloak wouldn’t have got me over that 
line,” said Harry slowly. 

“Oh right,” said Ron. “I thought you might’ve told me 
if it was the cloak ... because it would’ve covered both 
of us, wouldn’t it? But you found another way, did 
you?” 

“Listen,” said Harry, “I didn’t put my name in that 
goblet. Someone else must’ve done it.” 

Ron raised his eyebrows. 

“What would they do that for?” 

“I dunno,” said Harry. He felt it would sound very 
melodramatic to say, “To kill me.” 

Ron’s eyebrows rose so high that they were in danger 
of disappearing into his hair. 

“It’s okay, you know, you can tell me the truth,” he 
said. “If you don’t want everyone else to know, fine, 
but I don’t know why you’re bothering to lie, you 
didn’t get into trouble for it, did you? That friend of 
the Fat Lady’s, that Violet, she’s already told us all 
Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore’s letting you enter. A thousand Galleons 
prize money, eh? And you don’t have to do end-of- 
year tests either. ...” 

“I didn’t put my name in that goblet!” said Harry, 
starting to feel angry. 

“Yeah, okay,” said Ron, in exactly the same sceptical 
tone as Cedric. “Only you said this morning you’d 
have done it last night, and no one would’ve seen you. 
... I’m not stupid, you know.” 

“You’re doing a really good impression of it,” Harry 
snapped. 

“Yeah?” said Ron, and there was no trace of a grin, 
forced or otherwise, on his face now. “You want to get 
to bed, Harry. I expect you’ll need to be up early 
tomorrow for a photo-call or something.” 

He wrenched the hangings shut around his four- 
poster, leaving Harry standing there by the door, 
staring at the dark red velvet curtains, now hiding 
one of the few people he had been sure would believe 
him. 



Page | 318 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE WEIGHING OF THE WANDS 

When Harry woke up on Sunday morning, it took him 
a moment to remember why he felt so miserable and 
worried. Then the memory of the previous night rolled 
over him. He sat up and ripped back the curtains of 
his own four-poster, intending to talk to Ron, to force 
Ron to believe him — only to find that Ron’s bed was 
empty; he had obviously gone down to breakfast. 

Harry dressed and went down the spiral staircase into 
the common room. The moment he appeared, the 
people who had already finished breakfast broke into 
applause again. The prospect of going down into the 
Great Hall and facing the rest of the Gryffindors, all 
treating him like some sort of hero, was not inviting; 
it was that, however, or stay here and allow himself to 
be cornered by the Creevey brothers, who were both 
beckoning frantically to him to join them. He walked 
resolutely over to the portrait hole, pushed it open, 
climbed out of it, and found himself face-to-face with 
Hermione. 



Page | 319 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“Hello,” she said, holding up a stack of toast, which 
she was carrying in a napkin. “I brought you this. ... 
Want to go for a walk?” 

“Good idea,” said Harry gratefully. 

They went downstairs, crossed the entrance hall 
quickly without looking in at the Great Hall, and were 
soon striding across the lawn toward the lake, where 
the Durmstrang ship was moored, reflected blackly in 
the water. It was a chilly morning, and they kept 
moving, munching their toast, as Harry told 
Hermione exactly what had happened after he had left 
the Gryffindor table the night before. To his immense 
relief, Hermione accepted his story without question. 

“Well, of course I knew you hadn’t entered yourself,” 
she said when he’d finished telling her about the 
scene in the chamber off the Hall. “The look on your 
face when Dumbledore read out your name! But the 
question is, who did put it in? Because Moody’s right, 
Harry ... I don’t think any student could have done it 
... they’d never be able to fool the Goblet, or get over 
Dumbledore ’s — ” 

“Have you seen Ron?” Harry interrupted. 

Hermione hesitated. 

“Erm ... yes ... he was at breakfast,” she said. 

“Does he still think I entered myself?” 

“Well ... no, I don’t think so ... not really,” said 
Hermione awkwardly. 

“What’s that supposed to mean, ‘not really’?” 



Page | 320 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh Harry, isn’t it obvious?” Hermione said 
despairingly. “He’s jealous!” 



“Jealous?” Harry said incredulously. “Jealous of 
what? He wants to make a prat of himself in front of 
the whole school, does he?” 

“Look,” said Hermione patiently, “it’s always you who 
gets all the attention, you know it is. I know it’s not 
your fault,” she added quickly, seeing Harry open his 
mouth furiously. “I know you don’t ask for it ... but — 
well — you know, Ron’s got all those brothers to 
compete against at home, and you’re his best friend, 
and you’re really famous — he’s always shunted to 
one side whenever people see you, and he puts up 
with it, and he never mentions it, but I suppose this 
is just one time too many. ...” 

“Great,” said Harry bitterly. “Really great. Tell him 
from me I’ll swap any time he wants. Tell him from 
me he’s welcome to it. ... People gawping at my 
forehead everywhere I go. ...” 

“I’m not telling him anything,” Hermione said shortly. 
“Tell him yourself. It’s the only way to sort this out.” 

“I’m not running around after him trying to make him 
grow up!” Harry said, so loudly that several owls in a 
nearby tree took flight in alarm. “Maybe he’ll believe 
I’m not enjoying myself once I’ve got my neck broken 
or — ” 



“That’s not funny,” said Hermione quietly. “That’s not 
funny at all.” She looked extremely anxious. “Harry, 
I’ve been thinking — you know what we’ve got to do, 
don’t you? Straight away, the moment we get back to 
the castle?” 

“Yeah, give Ron a good kick up the — ” 

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Write to Sirius. You’ve got to tell him what’s 
happened. He asked you to keep him posted on 
everything that’s going on at Hogwarts. ... It’s almost 
as if he expected something like this to happen. I 
brought some parchment and a quill out with me — ” 

“Come off it,” said Harry, looking around to check 
that they couldn’t be overheard, but the grounds were 
quite deserted. “He came back to the country just 
because my scar twinged. He’ll probably come 
bursting right into the castle if I tell him someone’s 
entered me in the Triwizard Tournament — ” 

“He’d want you to tell him,” said Hermione sternly. 
“He’s going to find out anyway — ” 

“How?” 

“Harry, this isn’t going to be kept quiet,” said 
Hermione, very seriously. “This tournament’s famous, 
and you’re famous. Ill be really surprised if there isn’t 
anything in the Daily Prophet about you competing. . . . 
You’re already in half the books about You-Know- 
Who, you know ... and Sirius would rather hear it 
from you, I know he would.” 

“Okay, okay, I’ll write to him,” said Harry, throwing 
his last piece of toast into the lake. They both stood 
and watched it floating there for a moment, before a 
large tentacle rose out of the water and scooped it 
beneath the surface. Then they returned to the castle. 

“Whose owl am I going to use?” Harry said as they 
climbed the stairs. “He told me not to use Hedwig 
again.” 

“Ask Ron if you can borrow — ” 

“I’m not asking Ron for anything,” Harry said flatly. 

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, borrow one of the school owls, then, anyone 
can use them,” said Hermione. 

They went up to the Owlery Hermione gave Harry a 
piece of parchment, a quill, and a bottle of ink, then 
strolled around the long lines of perches, looking at 
all the different owls, while Harry sat down against a 
wall and wrote his letter. 

Dear Sirius, 

You told me to keep you posted on what’s happening 
at Hogwarts, so here goes — I don’t know if you’ve 
heard, but the Tri-wizard Tournament’s happening this 
year and on Saturday night I got picked as a fourth 
champion. I don’t know who put my name in the Goblet 
of Fire, because I didn’t The other Hogwarts champion 
is Cedric Diggory, from Hufflepuff 

He paused at this point, thinking. He had an urge to 
say something about the large weight of anxiety that 
seemed to have settled inside his chest since last 
night, but he couldn’t think how to translate this into 
words, so he simply dipped his quill back into the ink 
bottle and wrote, 

Hope you’re okay, and Buckbeak — Harry 



“Finished,” he told Hermione, getting to his feet and 
brushing straw off his robes. At this, Hedwig came 
fluttering down onto his shoulder and held out her 
leg. 

“I can’t use you,” Harry told her, looking around for 
the school owls. “I’ve got to use one of these. ...” 



Page | 323 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hedwig gave a very loud hoot and took off so suddenly 
that her talons cut into his shoulder. She kept her 
back to Harry all the time he was tying his letter to 
the leg of a large barn owl. When the barn owl had 
flown off, Harry reached out to stroke Hedwig, but she 
clicked her beak furiously and soared up into the 
rafters out of reach. 

“First Ron, then you,” said Harry angrily. “ This isn’t 
my fault.” 

If Harry had thought that matters would improve 
once everyone got used to the idea of him being 
champion, the following day showed him how 
mistaken he was. He could no longer avoid the rest of 
the school once he was back at lessons — and it was 
clear that the rest of the school, just like the 
Gryffindors, thought Harry had entered himself for 
the tournament. Unlike the Gryffindors, however, 
they did not seem impressed. 

The Hufflepuffs, who were usually on excellent terms 
with the Gryffindors, had turned remarkably cold 
toward the whole lot of them. One Herbology lesson 
was enough to demonstrate this. It was plain that the 
Hufflepuffs felt that Harry had stolen their 
champion’s glory; a feeling exacerbated, perhaps, by 
the fact that Hufflepuff House very rarely got any 
glory, and that Cedric was one of the few who had 
ever given them any, having beaten Gryffindor once at 
Quidditch. Ernie Macmillan and Justin Finch- 
Fletchley, with whom Harry normally got on very well, 
did not talk to him even though they were repotting 
Bouncing Bulbs at the same tray — though they did 
laugh rather unpleasantly when one of the Bouncing 
Bulbs wriggled free from Harry’s grip and smacked 
him hard in the face. Ron wasn’t talking to Harry 
either. Hermione sat between them, making very 
forced conversation, but though both answered her 
Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




normally, they avoided making eye contact with each 
other. Harry thought even Professor Sprout seemed 
distant with him — but then, she was Head of 
Hufflepuff House. 

He would have been looking forward to seeing Hagrid 
under normal circumstances, but Care of Magical 
Creatures meant seeing the Slytherins too — the first 
time he would come face-to-face with them since 
becoming champion. 

Predictably, Malfoy arrived at Hagrid ’s cabin with his 
familiar sneer firmly in place. 

“Ah, look, boys, it’s the champion,” he said to Crabbe 
and Goyle the moment he got within earshot of Harry. 
“Got your autograph books? Better get a signature 
now, because I doubt he’s going to be around much 
longer. ... Half the Triwizard champions have died ... 
how long d’you reckon you’re going to last, Potter? 

Ten minutes into the first task’s my bet.” 

Crabbe and Goyle guffawed sycophantically, but 
Malfoy had to stop there, because Hagrid emerged 
from the back of his cabin balancing a teetering tower 
of crates, each containing a very large Blast-Ended 
Skrewt. To the class’s horror, Hagrid proceeded to 
explain that the reason the skrewts had been killing 
one another was an excess of pent-up energy, and 
that the solution would be for each student to fix a 
leash on a skrewt and take it for a short walk. The 
only good thing about this plan was that it distracted 
Malfoy completely. 

“Take this thing for a walk?” he repeated in disgust, 
staring into one of the boxes. “And where exactly are 
we supposed to fix the leash? Around the sting, the 
blasting end, or the sucker?” 



Page | 325 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Roun’ the middle,” said Hagrid, demonstrating. “Er 
— yeh might want ter put on yer dragon-hide gloves, 
jus’ as an extra precaution, like. Harry — you come 
here an’ help me with this big one. ...” 

Hagrid’s real intention, however, was to talk to Harry 
away from the rest of the class. He waited until 
everyone else had set off with their skrewts, then 
turned to Harry and said, very seriously, “So — yer 
competin’, Harry. In the tournament. School 
champion.” 

“One of the champions,” Harry corrected him. 

Hagrid’s beetle-black eyes looked very anxious under 
his wild eyebrows. 

“No idea who put yeh in fer it, Harry?” 

“You believe I didn’t do it, then?” said Harry, 
concealing with difficulty the rush of gratitude he felt 
at Hagrid’s words. 

“ ’Course I do,” Hagrid grunted. “Yeh say it wasn’ you, 
an’ I believe yeh — an’ Dumbledore believes yer, an’ 
all.” 

“Wish I knew who did do it,” said Harry bitterly. 

The pair of them looked out over the lawn; the class 
was widely scattered now, and all in great difficulty. 
The skrewts were now over three feet long, and 
extremely powerful. No longer shell-less and colorless, 
they had developed a kind of thick, grayish, shiny 
armor. They looked like a cross between giant 
scorpions and elongated crabs — but still without 
recognizable heads or eyes. They had become 
immensely strong and very hard to control. 



Page | 326 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Look like they’re havin’ fun, don’ they?” Hagrid said 
happily. Harry assumed he was talking about the 
skrewts, because his classmates certainly weren’t; 
every now and then, with an alarming bang, one of 
the skrewts’ ends would explode, causing it to shoot 
forward several yards, and more than one person was 
being dragged along on their stomach, trying 
desperately to get back on their feet. 

“Ah, I don’ know, Harry,” Hagrid sighed suddenly, 
looking back down at him with a worried expression 
on his face. “School champion ... everythin’ seems ter 
happen ter you, doesn’ it?” 

Harry didn’t answer. Yes, everything did seem to 
happen to him ... that was more or less what 
Hermione had said as they had walked around the 
lake, and that was the reason, according to her, that 
Ron was no longer talking to him. 

The next few days were some of Harry’s worst at 
Hogwarts. The closest he had ever come to feeling like 
this had been during those months, in his second 
year, when a large part of the school had suspected 
him of attacking his fellow students. But Ron had 
been on his side then. He thought he could have 
coped with the rest of the school’s behavior if he could 
just have had Ron back as a friend, but he wasn’t 
going to try and persuade Ron to talk to him if Ron 
didn’t want to. Nevertheless, it was lonely with dislike 
pouring in on him from all sides. 

He could understand the Hufflepuffs’ attitude, even if 
he didn’t like it; they had their own champion to 
support. He expected nothing less than vicious 
insults from the Slytherins — he was highly 
unpopular there and always had been, because he 
had helped Gryffindor beat them so often, both at 
Quidditch and in the Inter-House Championship. But 
Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




he had hoped the Ravenclaws might have found it in 
their hearts to support him as much as Cedric. He 
was wrong, however. Most Ravenclaws seemed to 
think that he had been desperate to earn himself a bit 
more fame by tricking the goblet into accepting his 
name. 

Then there was the fact that Cedric looked the part of 
a champion so much more than he did. Exceptionally 
handsome, with his straight nose, dark hair, and gray 
eyes, it was hard to say who was receiving more 
admiration these days, Cedric or Viktor Krum. Harry 
actually saw the same sixth-year girls who had been 
so keen to get Krum’s autograph begging Cedric to 
sign their school bags one lunchtime. 

Meanwhile there was no reply from Sirius, Hedwig 
was refusing to come anywhere near him, Professor 
Trelawney was predicting his death with even more 
certainty than usual, and he did so badly at 
Summoning Charms in Professor Flitwick’s class that 
he was given extra homework — the only person to 
get any, apart from Neville. 

“It’s really not that difficult, Harry,” Hermione tried to 
reassure him as they left Flitwick’s class — she had 
been making objects zoom across the room to her all 
lesson, as though she were some sort of weird magnet 
for board dusters, wastepaper baskets, and 
lunascopes. “You just weren’t concentrating properly 



“Wonder why that was,” said Harry darkly as Cedric 
Diggory walked past, surrounded by a large group of 
simpering girls, all of whom looked at Harry as 
though he were a particularly large Blast-Ended 
Skrewt. “Still — never mind, eh? Double Potions to 
look forward to this afternoon. ...” 



Page | 328 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Double Potions was always a horrible experience, but 
these days it was nothing short of torture. Being shut 
in a dungeon for an hour and a half with Snape and 
the Slytherins, all of whom seemed determined to 
punish Harry as much as possible for daring to 
become school champion, was about the most 
unpleasant thing Harry could imagine. He had 
already struggled through one Friday’s worth, with 
Hermione sitting next to him intoning “ignore them, 
ignore them, ignore them” under her breath, and he 
couldn’t see why today should be any better. 

When he and Hermione arrived at Snape ’s dungeon 
after lunch, they found the Slytherins waiting outside, 
each and every one of them wearing a large badge on 
the front of his or her robes. For one wild moment 
Harry thought they were S.P.E.W. badges — then he 
saw that they all bore the same message, in luminous 
red letters that burnt brightly in the dimly lit 
underground passage: 

Support CEDRIC DIGGORY — 

The REAL Hogwarts Champion 

“Like them, Potter?” said Malfoy loudly as Harry 
approached. “And this isn’t all they do — look!” 

He pressed his badge into his chest, and the message 
upon it vanished, to be replaced by another one, 
which glowed green: 

POTTER STINKS 

The Slytherins howled with laughter. Each of them 
pressed their badges too, until the message POTTER 
STINKS was shining brightly all around Harry. He felt 
the heat rise in his face and neck. 



Page | 329 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh very funny,” Hermione said sarcastically to Pansy 
Parkinson and her gang of Slytherin girls, who were 
laughing harder than anyone, “really witty.” 

Ron was standing against the wall with Dean and 
Seamus. He wasn’t laughing, but he wasn’t sticking 
up for Harry either. 

“Want one, Granger?” said Malfoy, holding out a 
badge to Hermione. “I’ve got loads. But don’t touch 
my hand, now. I’ve just washed it, you see; don’t want 
a Mudblood sliming it up.” 

Some of the anger Harry had been feeling for days 
and days seemed to burst through a dam in his chest. 
He had reached for his wand before he’d thought 
what he was doing. People all around them scrambled 
out of the way, backing down the corridor. 

“Harry!” Hermione said warningly. 

“Go on, then, Potter,” Malfoy said quietly, drawing out 
his own wand. “Moody’s not here to look after you 
now — do it, if you’ve got the guts — ” 

For a split second, they looked into each other’s eyes, 
then, at exactly the same time, both acted. 

“ FurnunculusV’ Harry yelled. 

“ DensaugeoV’ screamed Malfoy. 

Jets of light shot from both wands, hit each other in 
midair, and ricocheted off at angles — Harry’s hit 
Goyle in the face, and Malfoy’s hit Hermione. Goyle 
bellowed and put his hands to his nose, where great 
ugly boils were springing up — Hermione, whimpering 
in panic, was clutching her mouth. 



Page | 330 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Hermione!” 



Ron had hurried forward to see what was wrong with 
her; Harry turned and saw Ron dragging Hermione ’s 
hand away from her face. It wasn’t a pretty sight. 
Hermione ’s front teeth — already larger than average 
— were now growing at an alarming rate; she was 
looking more and more like a beaver as her teeth 
elongated, past her bottom lip, toward her chin — 
panic-stricken, she felt them and let out a terrified 
cry. 

“And what is all this noise about?” said a soft, deadly 
voice. 

Snape had arrived. The Slytherins clamored to give 
their explanations; Snape pointed a long yellow finger 
at Malfoy and said, “Explain.” 

“Potter attacked me, sir — ” 

“We attacked each other at the same time!” Harry 
shouted. 

“ — and he hit Goyle — look — ” 

Snape examined Goyle, whose face now resembled 
something that would have been at home in a book 
on poisonous fungi. 

“Hospital wing, Goyle,” Snape said calmly. 

“Malfoy got Hermione!” Ron said. “Loo/d” 

He forced Hermione to show Snape her teeth — she 
was doing her best to hide them with her hands, 
though this was difficult as they had now grown down 
past her collar. Pansy Parkinson and the other 



Page | 331 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Slytherin girls were doubled up with silent giggles, 
pointing at Hermione from behind Snape ’s back. 

Snape looked coldly at Hermione, then said, “I see no 
difference.” 

Hermione let out a whimper; her eyes filled with tears, 
she turned on her heel and ran, ran all the way up 
the corridor and out of sight. 

It was lucky, perhaps, that both Harry and Ron 
started shouting at Snape at the same time; lucky 
their voices echoed so much in the stone corridor, for 
in the confused din, it was impossible for him to hear 
exactly what they were calling him. He got the gist, 
however. 

“Let’s see,” he said, in his silkiest voice. “Fifty points 
from Gryffindor and a detention each for Potter and 
Weasley. Now get inside, or it’ll be a week’s worth of 
detentions.” 

Harry’s ears were ringing. The injustice of it made 
him want to curse Snape into a thousand slimy 
pieces. He passed Snape, walked with Ron to the 
back of the dungeon, and slammed his bag down onto 
the table. Ron was shaking with anger too — for a 
moment, it felt as though everything was back to 
normal between them, but then Ron turned and sat 
down with Dean and Seamus instead, leaving Harry 
alone at his table. On the other side of the dungeon, 
Malfoy turned his back on Snape and pressed his 
badge, smirking. POTTER STINKS flashed once more 
across the room. 

Harry sat there staring at Snape as the lesson began, 
picturing horrific things happening to him. ... If only 
he knew how to do the Cruciatus Curse ... he’d have 



Page | 332 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Snape flat on his back like that spider, jerking and 
twitching. ... 

“Antidotes!” said Snape, looking around at them all, 
his cold black eyes glittering unpleasantly. “You 
should all have prepared your recipes now. I want you 
to brew them carefully, and then, we will be selecting 
someone on whom to test one. ...” 

Snape’s eyes met Harry’s, and Harry knew what was 
coming. Snape was going to poison him. Harry 
imagined picking up his cauldron, and sprinting to 
the front of the class, and bringing it down on Snape’s 
greasy head — 

And then a knock on the dungeon door burst in on 
Harry’s thoughts. 

It was Colin Creevey; he edged into the room, 
beaming at Harry, and walked up to Snape’s desk at 
the front of the room. 

“Yes?” said Snape curtly. 

“Please, sir, I’m supposed to take Harry Potter 
upstairs.” 

Snape stared down his hooked nose at Colin, whose 
smile faded from his eager face. 

“Potter has another hour of Potions to complete,” said 
Snape coldly. “He will come upstairs when this class 
is finished.” 

Colin went pink. 

“Sir — sir, Mr. Bagman wants him,” he said 
nervously. “All the champions have got to go, I think 
they want to take photographs. ...” 

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry would have given anything he owned to have 
stopped Colin saying those last few words. He 
chanced half a glance at Ron, but Ron was staring 
determinedly at the ceiling. 

“Very well, very well,” Snape snapped. “Potter, leave 
your things here, I want you back down here later to 
test your antidote.” 

“Please, sir — he’s got to take his things with him,” 
squeaked Colin. “All the champions — ” 

“Very well\” said Snape. “Potter — take your bag and 
get out of my sight!” 

Harry swung his bag over his shoulder, got up, and 
headed for the door. As he walked through the 
Slytherin desks, POTTER STINKS flashed at him from 
every direction. 

“It’s amazing, isn’t it, Harry?” said Colin, starting to 
speak the moment Harry had closed the dungeon 
door behind him. “Isn’t it, though? You being 
champion?” 

“Yeah, really amazing,” said Harry heavily as they set 
off toward the steps into the entrance hall. “What do 
they want photos for, Colin?” 

“The Daily Prophet, I think!” 

“Great,” said Harry dully. “Exactly what I need. More 
publicity.” 

“Good luck!” said Colin when they had reached the 
right room. Harry knocked on the door and entered. 

He was in a fairly small classroom; most of the desks 
had been pushed away to the back of the room, 

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




leaving a large space in the middle; three of them, 
however, had been placed end-to-end in front of the 
blackboard and covered with a long length of velvet. 
Five chairs had been set behind the velvet-covered 
desks, and Ludo Bagman was sitting in one of them, 
talking to a witch Harry had never seen before, who 
was wearing magenta robes. 

Viktor Krum was standing moodily in a corner as 
usual and not talking to anybody. Cedric and Fleur 
were in conversation. Fleur looked a good deal 
happier than Harry had seen her so far; she kept 
throwing back her head so that her long silvery hair 
caught the light. A paunchy man, holding a large 
black camera that was smoking slightly, was 
watching Fleur out of the corner of his eye. 

Bagman suddenly spotted Harry, got up quickly, and 
bounded forward. 

“Ah, here he is! Champion number four! In you come, 
Harry, in you come ... nothing to worry about, it’s just 
the wand weighing ceremony, the rest of the judges 
will be here in a moment — ” 

“Wand weighing?” Harry repeated nervously. 

“We have to check that your wands are fully 
functional, no problems, you know, as they’re your 
most important tools in the tasks ahead,” said 
Bagman. “The expert’s upstairs now with 
Dumbledore. And then there’s going to be a little 
photo shoot. This is Rita Skeeter,” he added, 
gesturing toward the witch in magenta robes. “She’s 
doing a small piece on the tournament for the Daily 
Prophet ...” 

“Maybe not that small, Ludo,” said Rita Skeeter, her 
eyes on Harry. 

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Her hair was set in elaborate and curiously rigid curls 
that contrasted oddly with her heavy-jawed face. She 
wore jeweled spectacles. The thick fingers clutching 
her crocodile-skin handbag ended in two-inch nails, 
painted crimson. 

“I wonder if I could have a little word with Harry 
before we start?” she said to Bagman, but still gazing 
fixedly at Harry. “The youngest champion, you know 
... to add a bit of color?” 

“Certainly!” cried Bagman. “That is — if Harry has no 
objection?” 

“Er — ” said Harry. 

“Lovely,” said Rita Skeeter, and in a second, her 
scarlet-taloned fingers had Harry’s upper arm in a 
surprisingly strong grip, and she was steering him 
out of the room again and opening a nearby door. 

“We don’t want to be in there with all that noise,” she 
said. “Let’s see ... ah, yes, this is nice and cozy.” 

It was a broom cupboard. Harry stared at her. 

“Come along, dear — that’s right — lovely,” said Rita 
Skeeter again, perching herself precariously upon an 
upturned bucket, pushing Harry down onto a 
cardboard box, and closing the door, throwing them 
into darkness. “Let’s see now ...” 

She unsnapped her crocodile-skin handbag and 
pulled out a handful of candles, which she lit with a 
wave of her wand and magicked into midair, so that 
they could see what they were doing. 

“You won’t mind, Harry, if I use a Quick-Quotes 
Quill? It leaves me free to talk to you normally. ...” 

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“A what?” said Harry. 



Rita Skeeter’s smile widened. Harry counted three 
gold teeth. She reached again into her crocodile bag 
and drew out a long acid-green quill and a roll of 
parchment, which she stretched out between them on 
a crate of Mrs. Skower’s All-Purpose Magical Mess 
Remover. She put the tip of the green quill into her 
mouth, sucked it for a moment with apparent relish, 
then placed it upright on the parchment, where it 
stood balanced on its point, quivering slightly. 

“Testing ... my name is Rita Skeeter, Daily Prophet 
reporter.” 

Harry looked down quickly at the quill. The moment 
Rita Skeeter had spoken, the green quill had started 
to scribble, skidding across the parchment: 

Attractive blonde Rita Skeeter, forty-three, whose 
savage quill has punctured many inflated reputations 



“Lovely,” said Rita Skeeter, yet again, and she ripped 
the top piece of parchment off, crumpled it up, and 
stuffed it into her handbag. Now she leaned toward 
Harry and said, “So, Harry ... what made you decide 
to enter the Triwizard Tournament?” 

“Er — ” said Harry again, but he was distracted by the 
quill. Even though he wasn’t speaking, it was dashing 
across the parchment, and in its wake he could make 
out a fresh sentence: 

An ugly scar, souvenir of a tragic past, disfigures the 
otherwise charming face of Harry Potter, whose eyes 



Page | 337 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ignore the quill, Harry,” said Rita Skeeter firmly. 
Reluctantly, Harry looked up at her instead. “Now — 
why did you decide to enter the tournament, Harry?” 

“I didn’t,” said Harry. “I don’t know how my name got 
into the Goblet of Fire. I didn’t put it in there.” 

Rita Skeeter raised one heavily penciled eyebrow. 

“Come now, Harry, there’s no need to be scared of 
getting into trouble. We all know you shouldn’t really 
have entered at all. But don’t worry about that. Our 
readers love a rebel.” 

“But I didn’t enter,” Harry repeated. “I don’t know 
who — ” 

“How do you feel about the tasks ahead?” said Rita 
Skeeter. “Excited? Nervous?” 

“I haven’t really thought ... yeah, nervous, I suppose,” 
said Harry. His insides squirmed uncomfortably as he 
spoke. 

“Champions have died in the past, haven’t they?” said 
Rita Skeeter briskly. “Have you thought about that at 
all?” 

“Well ... they say it’s going to be a lot safer this year,” 
said Harry. 

The quill whizzed across the parchment between 
them, back and forward as though it were skating. 

“Of course, you’ve looked death in the face before, 
haven’t you?” said Rita Skeeter, watching him closely. 
“How would you say that’s affected you?” 

“Er,” said Harry, yet again. 

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Do you think that the trauma in your past might 
have made you keen to prove yourself? To live up to 
your name? Do you think that perhaps you were 
tempted to enter the Triwizard Tournament because 



“I didn’t enter,” said Harry, starting to feel irritated. 

“Can you remember your parents at all?” said Rita 
Skeeter, talking over him. 

“No,” said Harry. 

“How do you think they’d feel if they knew you were 
competing in the Triwizard Tournament? Proud? 
Worried? Angry?” 

Harry was feeling really annoyed now. How on earth 
was he to know how his parents would feel if they 
were alive? He could feel Rita Skeeter watching him 
very intently. Frowning, he avoided her gaze and 
looked down at words the quill had just written: 

Tears fill those startling green eyes as our 
conversation turns to the parents he can barely 
remember. 

“I have NOT got tears in my eyes!” said Harry loudly. 

Before Rita Skeeter could say a word, the door of the 
broom cupboard was pulled open. Harry looked 
around, blinking in the bright light. Albus 
Dumbledore stood there, looking down at both of 
them, squashed into the cupboard. 

“ Dumbledorel” cried Rita Skeeter, with every 
appearance of delight — but Harry noticed that her 
quill and the parchment had suddenly vanished from 
the box of Magical Mess Remover, and Rita’s clawed 

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




fingers were hastily snapping shut the clasp of her 
crocodile-skin bag. “How are you?” she said, standing 
up and holding out one of her large, mannish hands 
to Dumbledore. “I hope you saw my piece over the 
summer about the International Confederation of 
Wizards’ Conference?” 

“Enchantingly nasty,” said Dumbledore, his eyes 
twinkling. “I particularly enjoyed your description of 
me as an obsolete dingbat.” 

Rita Skeeter didn’t look remotely abashed. 

“I was just making the point that some of your ideas 
are a little old-fashioned, Dumbledore, and that many 
wizards in the street — ” 

“I will be delighted to hear the reasoning behind the 
rudeness, Rita,” said Dumbledore, with a courteous 
bow and a smile, “but I’m afraid we will have to 
discuss the matter later. The Weighing of the Wands 
is about to start, and it cannot take place if one of our 
champions is hidden in a broom cupboard.” 

Very glad to get away from Rita Skeeter, Harry 
hurried back into the room. The other champions 
were now sitting in chairs near the door, and he sat 
down quickly next to Cedric, looking up at the velvet- 
covered table, where four of the five judges were now 
sitting — Professor Karkaroff, Madame Maxime, Mr. 
Crouch, and Ludo Bagman. Rita Skeeter settled 
herself down in a corner; Harry saw her slip the 
parchment out of her bag again, spread it on her 
knee, suck the end of the Quick-Quotes Quill, and 
place it once more on the parchment. 

“May I introduce Mr. Ollivander?” said Dumbledore, 
taking his place at the judges’ table and talking to the 
champions. “He will be checking your wands to 

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




ensure that they are in good condition before the 
tournament.” 

Harry looked around, and with a jolt of surprise saw 
an old wizard with large, pale eyes standing quietly by 
the window. Harry had met Mr. Ollivander before — 
he was the wand-maker from whom Harry had 
bought his own wand over three years ago in Diagon 
Alley. 

“Mademoiselle Delacour, could we have you first, 
please?” said Mr. Ollivander, stepping into the empty 
space in the middle of the room. 

Fleur Delacour swept over to Mr. Ollivander and 
handed him her wand. 

“Hmmm ...” he said. 

He twirled the wand between his long fingers like a 
baton and it emitted a number of pink and gold 
sparks. Then he held it close to his eyes and 
examined it carefully. 

“Yes,” he said quietly, “nine and a half inches ... 
inflexible . . . rosewood . . . and containing . . . dear me 



“An ’air from ze ’ead of a veela,” said Fleur. “One of 
my grandmuzzer’s.” 

So Fleur was part veela, thought Harry, making a 
mental note to tell Ron . . . then he remembered that 
Ron wasn’t speaking to him. 

“Yes,” said Mr. Ollivander, “yes, I’ve never used veela 
hair myself, of course. I find it makes for rather 
temperamental wands . . . however, to each his own, 
and if this suits you ...” 

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Ollivander ran his fingers along the wand, 
apparently checking for scratches or bumps; then he 
muttered, “ OrchideousV’ and a bunch of flowers burst 
from the wand tip. 

“Very well, very well, it’s in fine working order,” said 
Mr. Ollivander, scooping up the flowers and handing 
them to Fleur with her wand. “Mr. Diggory, you next.” 

Fleur glided back to her seat, smiling at Cedric as he 
passed her. 

“Ah, now, this is one of mine, isn’t it?” said Mr. 
Ollivander, with much more enthusiasm, as Cedric 
handed over his wand. “Yes, I remember it well. 
Containing a single hair from the tail of a particularly 
fine male unicorn . . . must have been seventeen 
hands; nearly gored me with his horn after I plucked 
his tail. Twelve and a quarter inches ... ash ... 
pleasantly springy. It’s in fine condition. ... You treat 
it regularly?” 

“Polished it last night,” said Cedric, grinning. 

Harry looked down at his own wand. He could see 
finger marks all over it. He gathered a fistful of robe 
from his knee and tried to rub it clean surreptitiously. 
Several gold sparks shot out of the end of it. Fleur 
Delacour gave him a very patronizing look, and he 
desisted. 

Mr. Ollivander sent a stream of silver smoke rings 
across the room from the tip of Cedric’s wand, 
pronounced himself satisfied, and then said, “Mr. 
Krum, if you please.” 

Viktor Krum got up and slouched, round-shouldered 
and duck-footed, toward Mr. Ollivander. He thrust 



Page | 342 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




out his wand and stood scowling, with his hands in 
the pockets of his robes. 



“Hmm,” said Mr. Ollivander, “this is a Gregorovitch 
creation, unless I’m much mistaken? A fine wand- 
maker, though the styling is never quite what I . . . 
however ...” 

He lifted the wand and examined it minutely, turning 
it over and over before his eyes. 

“Yes . . . hornbeam and dragon heartstring?” he shot at 
Krum, who nodded. “Rather thicker than one usually 
sees . . . quite rigid . . . ten and a quarter inches . . . 

Avis'.” 

The hornbeam wand let off a blast like a gun, and a 
number of small, twittering birds flew out of the end 
and through the open window into the watery 
sunlight. 

“Good,” said Mr. Ollivander, handing Krum back his 
wand. “Which leaves ... Mr. Potter.” 

Harry got to his feet and walked past Krum to Mr. 
Ollivander. He handed over his wand. 

“Aaaah, yes,” said Mr. Ollivander, his pale eyes 
suddenly gleaming. “Yes, yes, yes. How well I 
remember.” 

Harry could remember too. He could remember it as 
though it had happened yesterday. . . 

Four summers ago, on his eleventh birthday, he had 
entered Mr. Ollivander’s shop with Hagrid to buy a 
wand. Mr. Ollivander had taken his measurements 
and then started handing him wands to try. Harry 
had waved what felt like every wand in the shop, until 
Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




at last he had found the one that suited him — this 
one, which was made of holly, eleven inches long, and 
contained a single feather from the tail of a phoenix. 
Mr. Ollivander had been very surprised that Harry 
had been so compatible with this wand. “Curious,” he 
had said, “curious,” and not until Harry asked what 
was curious had Mr. Ollivander explained that the 
phoenix feather in Harry’s wand had come from the 
same bird that had supplied the core of Lord 
Voldemort’s. 

Harry had never shared this piece of information with 
anybody. He was very fond of his wand, and as far as 
he was concerned its relation to Voldemort’s wand 
was something it couldn’t help — rather as he 
couldn’t help being related to Aunt Petunia. However, 
he really hoped that Mr. Ollivander wasn’t about to 
tell the room about it. He had a funny feeling Rita 
Skeeter’s Quick-Quotes Quill might just explode with 
excitement if he did. 

Mr. Ollivander spent much longer examining Harry’s 
wand than anyone else’s. Eventually, however, he 
made a fountain of wine shoot out of it, and handed it 
back to Harry, announcing that it was still in perfect 
condition. 

“Thank you all,” said Dumbledore, standing up at the 
judges’ table. “You may go back to your lessons now 
— or perhaps it would be quicker just to go down to 
dinner, as they are about to end — ” 

Feeling that at last something had gone right today, 
Harry got up to leave, but the man with the black 
camera jumped up and cleared his throat. 

“Photos, Dumbledore, photos!” cried Bagman 
excitedly. “All the judges and champions, what do you 
think, Rita?” 

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Er — yes, let’s do those first,” said Rita Skeeter, 
whose eyes were upon Harry again. “And then 
perhaps some individual shots.” 

The photographs took a long time. Madame Maxime 
cast everyone else into shadow wherever she stood, 
and the photographer couldn’t stand far enough back 
to get her into the frame; eventually she had to sit 
while everyone else stood around her. Karkaroff kept 
twirling his goatee around his finger to give it an extra 
curl; Krum, whom Harry would have thought would 
have been used to this sort of thing, skulked, half- 
hidden, at the back of the group. The photographer 
seemed keenest to get Fleur at the front, but Rita 
Skeeter kept hurrying forward and dragging Harry 
into greater prominence. Then she insisted on 
separate shots of all the champions. At last, they were 
free to go. 

Harry went down to dinner. Hermione wasn’t there — 
he supposed she was still in the hospital wing having 
her teeth fixed. He ate alone at the end of the table, 
then returned to Gryffindor Tower, thinking of all the 
extra work on Summoning Charms that he had to do. 
Up in the dormitory, he came across Ron. 

“You’ve had an owl,” said Ron brusquely the moment 
he walked in. He was pointing at Harry’s pillow. The 
school barn owl was waiting for him there. 

“Oh — right,” said Harry. 

“And we’ve got to do our detentions tomorrow night, 
Snape’s dungeon,” said Ron. 

He then walked straight out of the room, not looking 
at Harry. For a moment, Harry considered going after 
him — he wasn’t sure whether he wanted to talk to 
him or hit him, both seemed quite appealing — but 

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the lure of Sirius’s answer was too strong. Harry 
strode over to the barn owl, took the letter off its leg, 
and unrolled it. 

Harry — 

I can’t say everything I would like to in a letter, it’s too 
risky in case the owl is intercepted — we need to talk 
face-to-face. Can you ensure that you are alone by the 
fire in Gryffindor Tower at one o’clock in the morning 
on the 22nd of November? 

I know better than anyone that you can look after 
yourself and while you’re around Dumbledore and 
Moody I don’t think anyone will be able to hurt you. 
However, someone seems to be having a good try. 
Entering you in that tournament would have been very 
risky, especially right under Dumbledore’ s nose. 

Be on the watch, Harry. I still want to hear about 
anything unusual. Let me know about the 22nd of 
November as quickly as you can. 

Sirius 



Page | 346 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 








THE HUNGARIAN HORNTAIL 

The prospect of talking face-to-face with Sirius was all 
that sustained Harry over the next fortnight, the only 
bright spot on a horizon that had never looked 
darker. The shock of finding himself school champion 
had worn off slightly now, and the fear of what was 
facing him had started to sink in. The first task was 
drawing steadily nearer; he felt as though it were 
crouching ahead of him like some horrific monster, 
barring his path. He had never suffered nerves like 
these; they were way beyond anything he had 
experienced before a Quidditch match, not even his 
last one against Slytherin, which had decided who 
would win the Quidditch Cup. Harry was finding it 
hard to think about the future at all; he felt as though 
his whole life had been leading up to, and would 
finish with, the first task. ... 

Admittedly, he didn’t see how Sirius was going to 
make him feel any better about having to perform an 
unknown piece of difficult and dangerous magic in 
front of hundreds of people, but the mere sight of a 
friendly face would be something at the moment. 

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Harry wrote back to Sirius saying that he would be 
beside the common room fire at the time Sirius had 
suggested, and he and Hermione spent a long time 
going over plans for forcing any stragglers out of the 
common room on the night in question. If the worst 
came to the worst, they were going to drop a bag of 
Dungbombs, but they hoped they wouldn’t have to 
resort to that — Filch would skin them alive. 

In the meantime, life became even worse for Harry 
within the confines of the castle, for Rita Skeeter had 
published her piece about the Triwizard Tournament, 
and it had turned out to be not so much a report on 
the tournament as a highly colored life story of Harry. 
Much of the front page had been given over to a 
picture of Harry; the article (continuing on pages two, 
six, and seven) had been all about Harry, the names 
of the Beauxbatons and Durmstrang champions 
(misspelled) had been squashed into the last line of 
the article, and Cedric hadn’t been mentioned at all. 

The article had appeared ten days ago, and Harry still 
got a sick, burning feeling of shame in his stomach 
every time he thought about it. Rita Skeeter had 
reported him saying an awful lot of things that he 
couldn’t remember ever saying in his life, let alone in 
that broom cupboard. 

I suppose I get my strength from my parents. I know 
they’d be very proud of me if they could see me now. 

... Yes, sometimes at night I still cry about them, I’m 
not ashamed to admit it. ... I know nothing will hurt 
me during the tournament, because they’re watching 
over me. ... 

But Rita Skeeter had gone even further than 
transforming his “er’s” into long, sickly sentences: 

She had interviewed other people about him too. 



Page | 348 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry has at last found love at Hogwarts. His close 
friend, Colin Creevey, says that Harry is rarely seen 
out of the company of one Hermione Granger, a 
stunningly pretty Muggle-born girl who, like Harry, is 
one of the top students in the school. 

From the moment the article had appeared, Harry 
had had to endure people — Slytherins, mainly — 
quoting it at him as he passed and making sneering 
comments. 

“Want a hanky, Potter, in case you start crying in 
Transfiguration?” 

“Since when have you been one of the top students in 
the school, Potter? Or is this a school you and 
Longbottom have set up together?” 

“Hey — Harry!” 

“Yeah, that’s right!” Harry found himself shouting as 
he wheeled around in the corridor, having had just 
about enough. “I’ve just been crying my eyes out over 
my dead mum, and I’m just off to do a bit more. ...” 

“No — it was just — you dropped your quill.” 

It was Cho. Harry felt the color rising in his face. 

“Oh — right — sorry,” he muttered, taking the quill 
back. 

“Er ... good luck on Tuesday,” she said. “I really hope 
you do well.” 

Which left Harry feeling extremely stupid. 

Hermione had come in for her fair share of 
unpleasantness too, but she hadn’t yet started yelling 

Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




at innocent bystanders; in fact, Harry was full of 
admiration for the way she was handling the 
situation. 

“ Stunningly pretty? Her?” Pansy Parkinson had 
shrieked the first time she had come face-to-face with 
Hermione after Rita’s article had appeared. “What was 
she judging against — a chipmunk?” 

“Ignore it,” Hermione said in a dignified voice, holding 
her head in the air and stalking past the sniggering 
Slytherin girls as though she couldn’t hear them. 

“Just ignore it, Harry.” 

But Harry couldn’t ignore it. Ron hadn’t spoken to 
him at all since he had told him about Snape’s 
detentions. Harry had half hoped they would make 
things up during the two hours they were forced to 
pickle rats’ brains in Snape’s dungeon, but that had 
been the day Rita’s article had appeared, which 
seemed to have confirmed Ron’s belief that Harry was 
really enjoying all the attention. 

Hermione was furious with the pair of them; she went 
from one to the other, trying to force them to talk to 
each other, but Harry was adamant: He would talk to 
Ron again only if Ron admitted that Harry hadn’t put 
his name in the Goblet of Fire and apologized for 
calling him a liar. 

“I didn’t start this,” Harry said stubbornly. “It’s his 
problem.” 

“You miss him!” Hermione said impatiently. “And I 
know he misses you — ” 

“Miss him?” said Harry. “I don’t miss him. ...” 



Page | 350 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But this was a downright lie. Harry liked Hermione 
very much, but she just wasn’t the same as Ron. 

There was much less laughter and a lot more hanging 
around in the library when Hermione was your best 
friend. Harry still hadn’t mastered Summoning 
Charms, he seemed to have developed something of a 
block about them, and Hermione insisted that 
learning the theory would help. They consequently 
spent a lot of time poring over books during their 
lunchtimes. 

Viktor Krum was in the library an awful lot too, and 
Harry wondered what he was up to. Was he studying, 
or was he looking for things to help him through the 
first task? Hermione often complained about Krum 
being there — not that he ever bothered them — but 
because groups of giggling girls often turned up to spy 
on him from behind bookshelves, and Hermione 
found the noise distracting. 

“He’s not even good-looking!” she muttered angrily, 
glaring at Krum’s sharp profile. “They only like him 
because he’s famous! They wouldn’t look twice at him 
if he couldn’t do that Wonky- Faint thing — ” 

“Wronski Feint,” said Harry, through gritted teeth. 
Quite apart from liking to get Quidditch terms 
correct, it caused him another pang to imagine Ron’s 
expression if he could have heard Hermione talking 
about Wonky- Faints. 

It is a strange thing, but when you are dreading 
something, and would give anything to slow down 
time, it has a disobliging habit of speeding up. The 
days until the first task seemed to slip by as though 
someone had fixed the clocks to work at double 
speed. Harry’s feeling of barely controlled panic was 
with him wherever he went, as everpresent as the 
snide comments about the Daily Prophet article. 

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




On the Saturday before the first task, all students in 
the third year and above were permitted to visit the 
village of Hogsmeade. Hermione told Harry that it 
would do him good to get away from the castle for a 
bit, and Harry didn’t need much persuasion. 

“What about Ron, though?” he said. “Don’t you want 
to go with him?” 

“Oh ... well ...” Hermione went slightly pink. “I 
thought we might meet up with him in the Three 
Broomsticks. ...” 

“No,” said Harry flatly. 

“Oh Harry, this is so stupid — ” 

“I’ll come, but I’m not meeting Ron, and I’m wearing 
my Invisibility Cloak.” 

“Oh all right then ...” Hermione snapped, “but I hate 
talking to you in that cloak, I never know if I’m 
looking at you or not.” 

So Harry put on his Invisibility Cloak in the 
dormitory, went back downstairs, and together he 
and Hermione set off for Hogsmeade. 

Harry felt wonderfully free under the cloak; he 
watched other students walking past them as they 
entered the village, most of them sporting Support 
Cedric Diggory\ badges, but no horrible remarks came 
his way for a change, and nobody was quoting that 
stupid article. 

“People keep looking at me now,” said Hermione 
grumpily as they came out of Honeydukes Sweetshop 
later, eating large cream-filled chocolates. “They think 
I’m talking to myself.” 

Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t move your lips so much then.” 



“Come on, please just take off your cloak for a bit, no 
one’s going to bother you here.” 

“Oh yeah?” said Harry. “Look behind you.” 

Rita Skeeter and her photographer friend had just 
emerged from the Three Broomsticks pub. Talking in 
low voices, they passed right by Hermione without 
looking at her. Harry backed into the wall of 
Honeydukes to stop Rita Skeeter from hitting him 
with her crocodile-skin handbag. When they were 
gone, Harry said, “She’s staying in the village. I bet 
she’s coming to watch the first task.” 

As he said it, his stomach flooded with a wave of 
molten panic. He didn’t mention this; he and 
Hermione hadn’t discussed what was coming in the 
first task much; he had the feeling she didn’t want to 
think about it. 

“She’s gone,” said Hermione, looking right through 
Harry toward the end of the street. “Why don’t we go 
and have a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks, it’s a 
bit cold, isn’t it? You don’t have to talk to Ron!” she 
added irritably, correctly interpreting his silence. 

The Three Broomsticks was packed, mainly with 
Hogwarts students enjoying their free afternoon, but 
also with a variety of magical people Harry rarely saw 
anywhere else. Harry supposed that as Hogsmeade 
was the only all-wizard village in Britain, it was a bit 
of a haven for creatures like hags, who were not as 
adept as wizards at disguising themselves. 

It was very hard to move through crowds in the 
Invisibility Cloak, in case you accidentally trod on 
someone, which tended to lead to awkward questions. 

Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry edged slowly toward a spare table in the corner 
while Hermione went to buy drinks. On his way 
through the pub, Harry spotted Ron, who was sitting 
with Fred, George, and Lee Jordan. Resisting the urge 
to give Ron a good hard poke in the back of the head, 
he finally reached the table and sat down at it. 

Hermione joined him a moment later and slipped him 
a butterbeer under his cloak. 

“I look like such an idiot, sitting here on my own,” she 
muttered. “Lucky I brought something to do.” 

And she pulled out a notebook in which she had been 
keeping a record of S.P.E.W. members. Harry saw his 
and Ron’s names at the top of the very short list. It 
seemed a long time ago that they had sat making up 
those predictions together, and Hermione had turned 
up and appointed them secretary and treasurer. 

“You know, maybe I should try and get some of the 
villagers involved in S.P.E.W.,” Hermione said 
thoughtfully, looking around the pub. 

“Yeah, right,” said Harry. He took a swig of butterbeer 
under his cloak. “Hermione, when are you going to 
give up on this spew stuff?” 

“When house-elves have decent wages and working 
conditions!” she hissed back. “You know, I’m starting 
to think it’s time for more direct action. I wonder how 
you get into the school kitchens?” 

“No idea, ask Fred and George,” said Harry. 

Hermione lapsed into thoughtful silence, while Harry 
drank his butterbeer, watching the people in the pub. 
All of them looked cheerful and relaxed. Ernie 
Macmillan and Hannah Abbott were swapping 

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Chocolate Frog cards at a nearby table; both of them 
sporting Support Cedric Diggory\ badges on their 
cloaks. Right over by the door he saw Cho and a large 
group of her Ravenclaw friends. She wasn’t wearing a 
Cedric badge though. ... This cheered up Harry very 
slightly. ... 

What wouldn’t he have given to be one of these 
people, sitting around laughing and talking, with 
nothing to worry about but homework? He imagined 
how it would have felt to be here if his name hadn’t 
come out of the Goblet of Fire. He wouldn’t be wearing 
the Invisibility Cloak, for one thing. Ron would be 
sitting with him. The three of them would probably be 
happily imagining what deadly dangerous task the 
school champions would be facing on Tuesday. He’d 
have been really looking forward to it, watching them 
do whatever it was . . . cheering on Cedric with 
everyone else, safe in a seat at the back of the stands. 



He wondered how the other champions were feeling. 
Every time he had seen Cedric lately, he had been 
surrounded by admirers and looking nervous but 
excited. Harry glimpsed Fleur Delacour from time to 
time in the corridors; she looked exactly as she 
always did, haughty and unruffled. And Krum just 
sat in the library, poring over books. 

Harry thought of Sirius, and the tight, tense knot in 
his chest seemed to ease slightly. He would be 
speaking to him in just over twelve hours, for tonight 
was the night they were meeting at the common room 
fire — assuming nothing went wrong, as everything 
else had done lately. ... 

“Look, it’s Hagrid!” said Hermione. 



Page | 355 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The back of Hagrid ’s enormous shaggy head — he 
had mercifully abandoned his bunches — emerged 
over the crowd. Harry wondered why he hadn’t 
spotted him at once, as Hagrid was so large, but 
standing up carefully, he saw that Hagrid had been 
leaning low, talking to Professor Moody. Hagrid had 
his usual enormous tankard in front of him, but 
Moody was drinking from his hip flask. Madam 
Rosmerta, the pretty landlady, didn’t seem to think 
much of this; she was looking askance at Moody as 
she collected glasses from tables around them. 
Perhaps she thought it was an insult to her mulled 
mead, but Harry knew better. Moody had told them 
all during their last Defense Against the Dark Arts 
lesson that he preferred to prepare his own food and 
drink at all times, as it was so easy for Dark wizards 
to poison an unattended cup. 

As Harry watched, he saw Hagrid and Moody get up 
to leave. He waved, then remembered that Hagrid 
couldn’t see him. Moody, however, paused, his 
magical eye on the corner where Harry was standing. 
He tapped Hagrid in the small of the back (being 
unable to reach his shoulder), muttered something to 
him, and then the pair of them made their way back 
across the pub toward Harry and Hermione’s table. 

“All right, Hermione?” said Hagrid loudly. 

“Hello,” said Hermione, smiling back. 

Moody limped around the table and bent down; Harry 
thought he was reading the S.P.E.W. notebook, until 
he muttered, “Nice cloak, Potter.” 

Harry stared at him in amazement. The large chunk 
missing from Moody’s nose was particularly obvious 
at a few inches’ distance. Moody grinned. 



Page | 356 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Can your eye — I mean, can you — ?” 



“Yeah, it can see through Invisibility Cloaks,” Moody 
said quietly. “And it’s come in useful at times, I can 
tell you.” 

Hagrid was beaming down at Harry too. Harry knew 
Hagrid couldn’t see him, but Moody had obviously 
told Hagrid he was there. Hagrid now bent down on 
the pretext of reading the S.P.E.W. notebook as well, 
and said in a whisper so low that only Harry could 
hear it, “Harry, meet me tonight at midnight at me 
cabin. Wear that cloak.” 

Straightening up, Hagrid said loudly, “Nice ter see 
yeh, Hermione,” winked, and departed. Moody 
followed him. 

“Why does Hagrid want me to meet him at midnight?” 
Harry said, very surprised. 

“Does he?” said Hermione, looking startled. “I wonder 
what he’s up to? I don’t know whether you should go, 
Harry. ...” She looked nervously around and hissed, 

“It might make you late for Sirius.” 

It was true that going down to Hagrid ’s at midnight 
would mean cutting his meeting with Sirius very fine 
indeed; Hermione suggested sending Hedwig down to 
Hagrid ’s to tell him he couldn’t go — always assuming 
she would consent to take the note, of course — 

Harry, however, thought it better just to be quick at 
whatever Hagrid wanted him for. He was very curious 
to know what this might be; Hagrid had never asked 
Harry to visit him so late at night. 

At half past eleven that evening, Harry, who had 
pretended to go up to bed early, pulled the Invisibility 
Cloak back over himself and crept back downstairs 

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




through the common room. Quite a few people were 
still in there. The Creevey brothers had managed to 
get hold of a stack of Support Cedric Diggoryl badges 
and were trying to bewitch them to make them say 
Support Harry Potter\ instead. So far, however, all they 
had managed to do was get the badges stuck on 
POTTER STINKS. Harry crept past them to the portrait 
hole and waited for a minute or so, keeping an eye on 
his watch. Then Hermione opened the Fat Lady for 
him from outside as they had planned. He slipped 
past her with a whispered “Thanks!” and set off 
through the castle. 

The grounds were very dark. Harry walked down the 
lawn toward the lights shining in Hagrid’s cabin. The 
inside of the enormous Beauxbatons carriage was 
also lit up; Harry could hear Madame Maxime talking 
inside it as he knocked on Hagrid’s front door. 

“You there, Harry?” Hagrid whispered, opening the 
door and looking around. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, slipping inside the cabin and 
pulling the cloak down off his head. “What’s up?” 

“Got summat ter show yeh,” said Hagrid. 

There was an air of enormous excitement about 
Hagrid. He was wearing a flower that resembled an 
oversized artichoke in his buttonhole. It looked as 
though he had abandoned the use of axle grease, but 
he had certainly attempted to comb his hair — Harry 
could see the comb’s broken teeth tangled in it. 

“What’re you showing me?” Harry said warily, 
wondering if the skrewts had laid eggs, or Hagrid had 
managed to buy another giant three-headed dog off a 
stranger in a pub. 



Page | 358 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come with me, keep quiet, an’ keep yerself covered 
with that cloak,” said Hagrid. “We won’ take Fang, he 
won’ like it. ...” 

“Listen, Hagrid, I can’t stay long. ... I’ve got to be back 
up at the castle by one o’clock — ” 

But Hagrid wasn’t listening; he was opening the cabin 
door and striding off into the night. Harry hurried to 
follow and found, to his great surprise, that Hagrid 
was leading him to the Beauxbatons carriage. 

“Hagrid, what — ?” 

“Shhh!” said Hagrid, and he knocked three times on 
the door bearing the crossed golden wands. 

Madame Maxime opened it. She was wearing a silk 
shawl wrapped around her massive shoulders. She 
smiled when she saw Hagrid. 

“Ah, ’Agrid ... it is time?” 

“Bong-sewer,” said Hagrid, beaming at her, and 
holding out a hand to help her down the golden steps. 

Madame Maxime closed the door behind her, Hagrid 
offered her his arm, and they set off around the edge 
of the paddock containing Madame Maxime ’s giant 
winged horses, with Harry, totally bewildered, 
running to keep up with them. Had Hagrid wanted to 
show him Madame Maxime? He could see her any old 
time he wanted ... she wasn’t exactly hard to miss. ... 

But it seemed that Madame Maxime was in for the 
same treat as Harry, because after a while she said 
playfully, “Wair is it you are taking me, ’Agrid?” 



Page | 359 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeh’ll enjoy this,” said Hagrid gruffly, “worth seem’, 
trust me. On’y — don’ go tellin’ anyone I showed yeh, 
right? Yeh’re not s’posed ter know.” 

“Of course not,” said Madame Maxime, fluttering her 
long black eyelashes. 

And still they walked, Harry getting more and more 
irritated as he jogged along in their wake, checking 
his watch every now and then. Hagrid had some 
harebrained scheme in hand, which might make him 
miss Sirius. If they didn’t get there soon, he was going 
to turn around, go straight back to the castle, and 
leave Hagrid to enjoy his moonlit stroll with Madame 
Maxime. ... 

But then — when they had walked so far around the 
perimeter of the forest that the castle and the lake 
were out of sight — Harry heard something. Men were 
shouting up ahead . . . then came a deafening, 
earsplitting roar. . . . 

Hagrid led Madame Maxime around a clump of trees 
and came to a halt. Harry hurried up alongside them 
— for a split second, he thought he was seeing 
bonfires, and men darting around them — and then 
his mouth fell open. 

Dragons. 

Four fully grown, enormous, vicious-looking dragons 
were rearing onto their hind legs inside an enclosure 
fenced with thick planks of wood, roaring and 
snorting — torrents of fire were shooting into the dark 
sky from their open, fanged mouths, fifty feet above 
the ground on their outstretched necks. There was a 
silvery-blue one with long, pointed horns, snapping 
and snarling at the wizards on the ground; a smooth- 
scaled green one, which was writhing and stamping 
Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




with all its might; a red one with an odd fringe of fine 
gold spikes around its face, which was shooting 
mushroom-shaped fire clouds into the air; and a 
gigantic black one, more lizard-like than the others, 
which was nearest to them. 

At least thirty wizards, seven or eight to each dragon, 
were attempting to control them, pulling on the 
chains connected to heavy leather straps around their 
necks and legs. Mesmerized, Harry looked up, high 
above him, and saw the eyes of the black dragon, with 
vertical pupils like a cat’s, bulging with either fear or 
rage, he couldn’t tell which. ... It was making a 
horrible noise, a yowling, screeching scream. ... 

“Keep back there, Hagrid!” yelled a wizard near the 
fence, straining on the chain he was holding. “They 
can shoot fire at a range of twenty feet, you know! I’ve 
seen this Horntail do forty!” 

“Is’n’ it beautiful?” said Hagrid softly. 

“It’s no good!” yelled another wizard. “Stunning 
Spells, on the count of three!” 

Harry saw each of the dragon keepers pull out his 
wand. 

“Stupefy\” they shouted in unison, and the Stunning 
Spells shot into the darkness like fiery rockets, 
bursting in showers of stars on the dragons’ scaly 
hides — 

Harry watched the dragon nearest to them teeter 
dangerously on its back legs; its jaws stretched wide 
in a silent howl; its nostrils were suddenly devoid of 
flame, though still smoking — then, very slowly, it 
fell. Several tons of sinewy, scaly-black dragon hit the 



Page | 361 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




ground with a thud that Harry could have sworn 
made the trees behind him quake. 



The dragon keepers lowered their wands and walked 
forward to their fallen charges, each of which was the 
size of a small hill. They hurried to tighten the chains 
and fasten them securely to iron pegs, which they 
forced deep into the ground with their wands. 

“Wan’ a closer look?” Hagrid asked Madame Maxime 
excitedly. The pair of them moved right up to the 
fence, and Harry followed. The wizard who had 
warned Hagrid not to come any closer turned, and 
Harry realized who it was: Charlie Weasley. 

“All right, Hagrid?” he panted, coming over to talk. 
“They should be okay now — we put them out with a 
Sleeping Draft on the way here, thought it might be 
better for them to wake up in the dark and the quiet 
— but, like you saw, they weren’t happy, not happy at 
all — ” 



“What breeds you got here, Charlie?” said Hagrid, 
gazing at the closest dragon, the black one, with 
something close to reverence. Its eyes were still just 
open. Harry could see a strip of gleaming yellow 
beneath its wrinkled black eyelid. 

“This is a Hungarian Horntail,” said Charlie. “There’s 
a Common Welsh Green over there, the smaller one — 
a Swedish Short-Snout, that blue-gray — and a 
Chinese Fireball, that’s the red.” 

Charlie looked around; Madame Maxime was strolling 
away around the edge of the enclosure, gazing at the 
stunned dragons. 

“I didn’t know you were bringing her, Hagrid,” Charlie 
said, frowning. “The champions aren’t supposed to 

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




know what’s coming — she’s bound to tell her 
student, isn’t she?” 



“Jus’ thought she’d like ter see ’em,” shrugged Hagrid, 
still gazing, enraptured, at the dragons. 

“Really romantic date, Hagrid,” said Charlie, shaking 
his head. 

“Four ...” said Hagrid, “so it’s one fer each o’ the 
champions, is it? What’ve they gotta do — fight ’em?” 

“Just get past them, I think,” said Charlie. “We’ll be 
on hand if it gets nasty, Extinguishing Spells at the 
ready. They wanted nesting mothers, I don’t know 
why ... but I tell you this, I don’t envy the one who 
gets the Horntail. Vicious thing. Its back end’s as 
dangerous as its front, look.” 

Charlie pointed toward the Horntail’s tail, and Harry 
saw long, bronze-colored spikes protruding along it 
every few inches. 

Five of Charlie’s fellow keepers staggered up to the 
Horntail at that moment, carrying a clutch of huge 
granite-gray eggs between them in a blanket. They 
placed them carefully at the Horntail’s side. Hagrid let 
out a moan of longing. 

“I’ve got them counted, Hagrid,” said Charlie sternly. 
Then he said, “How’s Harry?” 

“Fine,” said Hagrid. He was still gazing at the eggs. 

“Just hope he’s still fine after he’s faced this lot,” said 
Charlie grimly, looking out over the dragons’ 
enclosure. “I didn’t dare tell Mum what he’s got to do 
for the first task; she’s already having kittens about 
him. ...” Charlie imitated his mother’s anxious voice. “ 
Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




‘ How could they let him enter that tournament, he’s 
much too young\ I thought they were all safe, I thought 
there was going to he an age limiti ’ She was in floods 
after that Daily Prophet article about him. ‘He still 
cries about his parents\ Oh bless him, I never knew\ ’ ” 

Harry had had enough. Trusting to the fact that 
Hagrid wouldn’t miss him, with the attractions of four 
dragons and Madame Maxime to occupy him, he 
turned silently and began to walk away, back to the 
castle. 

He didn’t know whether he was glad he’d seen what 
was coming or not. Perhaps this way was better. The 
first shock was over now. Maybe if he’d seen the 
dragons for the first time on Tuesday, he would have 
passed out cold in front of the whole school ... but 
maybe he would anyway. ... He was going to be armed 
with his wand — which, just now, felt like nothing 
more than a narrow strip of wood — against a fifty- 
foot-high, scaly, spike-ridden, fire-breathing dragon. 
And he had to get past it. With everyone watching. 
How? 

Harry sped up, skirting the edge of the forest; he had 
just under fifteen minutes to get back to the fireside 
and talk to Sirius, and he couldn’t remember, ever, 
wanting to talk to someone more than he did right 
now — when, without warning, he ran into something 
very solid. 

Harry fell backward, his glasses askew, clutching the 
cloak around him. A voice nearby said, “Ouch! Who’s 
there?” 

Harry hastily checked that the cloak was covering 
him and lay very still, staring up at the dark outline 
of the wizard he had hit. He recognized the goatee ... 
it was Karkaroff. 

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Who’s there?” said Karkaroff again, very 
suspiciously, looking around in the darkness. Harry 
remained still and silent. After a minute or so, 
Karkaroff seemed to decide that he had hit some sort 
of animal; he was looking around at waist height, as 
though expecting to see a dog. Then he crept back 
under the cover of the trees and started to edge 
forward toward the place where the dragons were. 

Very slowly and very carefully, Harry got to his feet 
and set off again as fast as he could without making 
too much noise, hurrying through the darkness back 
toward Hogwarts. 

He had no doubt whatsoever what Karkaroff was up 
to. He had sneaked off his ship to try and find out 
what the first task was going to be. He might even 
have spotted Hagrid and Madame Maxime heading off 
around the forest together — they were hardly 
difficult to spot at a distance . . . and now all Karkaroff 
had to do was follow the sound of voices, and he, like 
Madame Maxime, would know what was in store for 
the champions. 

By the looks of it, the only champion who would be 
facing the unknown on Tuesday was Cedric. 

Harry reached the castle, slipped in through the front 
doors, and began to climb the marble stairs; he was 
very out of breath, but he didn’t dare slow down. ... 

He had less than five minutes to get up to the fire. ... 

“Balderdash!” he gasped at the Fat Lady, who was 
snoozing in her frame in front of the portrait hole. 

“If you say so,” she muttered sleepily, without opening 
her eyes, and the picture swung forward to admit 
him. Harry climbed inside. The common room was 
deserted, and, judging by the fact that it smelled quite 

Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




normal, Hermione had not needed to set off any 
Dungbombs to ensure that he and Sirius got privacy. 

Harry pulled off the Invisibility Cloak and threw 
himself into an armchair in front of the fire. The room 
was in semidarkness; the flames were the only source 
of light. Nearby, on a table, the Support Cedric 
Diggoryl badges the Creeveys had been trying to 
improve were glinting in the firelight. They now read 
POTTER REALLY STINKS. Harry looked back into the 
flames, and jumped. 

Sirius’s head was sitting in the fire. If Harry hadn’t 
seen Mr. Diggory do exactly this back in the Weasleys’ 
kitchen, it would have scared him out of his wits. 
Instead, his face breaking into the first smile he had 
worn for days, he scrambled out of his chair, 
crouched down by the hearth, and said, “Sirius — 
how ’re you doing?” 

Sirius looked different from Harry’s memory of him. 
When they had said good-bye, Sirius’s face had been 
gaunt and sunken, surrounded by a quantity of long, 
black, matted hair — but the hair was short and 
clean now, Sirius’s face was fuller, and he looked 
younger, much more like the only photograph Harry 
had of him, which had been taken at the Potters’ 
wedding. 

“Never mind me, how are you?” said Sirius seriously. 

“I’m — ” For a second, Harry tried to say “fine” — but 
he couldn’t do it. Before he could stop himself, he was 
talking more than he’d talked in days — about how 
no one believed he hadn’t entered the tournament of 
his own free will, how Rita Skeeter had lied about him 
in the Daily Prophet, how he couldn’t walk down a 
corridor without being sneered at — and about Ron, 
Ron not believing him, Ron’s jealousy ... 

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




"... and now Hagrid’s just shown me what’s coming in 
the first task, and it’s dragons, Sirius, and I’m a 
goner,” he finished desperately. 

Sirius looked at him, eyes full of concern, eyes that 
had not yet lost the look that Azkaban had given 
them — that deadened, haunted look. He had let 
Harry talk himself into silence without interruption, 
but now he said, “Dragons we can deal with, Harry, 
but we’ll get to that in a minute — I haven’t got long 
here ... I’ve broken into a wizarding house to use the 
fire, but they could be back at any time. There are 
things I need to warn you about.” 

“What?” said Harry, feeling his spirits slip a further 
few notches. ... Surely there could be nothing worse 
than dragons coming? 

“Karkaroff,” said Sirius. “Harry, he was a Death Eater. 
You know what Death Eaters are, don’t you?” 

“Yes — he — what?” 

“He was caught, he was in Azkaban with me, but he 
got released. I’d bet everything that’s why Dumbledore 
wanted an Auror at Hogwarts this year — to keep an 
eye on him. Moody caught Karkaroff. Put him into 
Azkaban in the first place.” 

“Karkaroff got released?” Harry said slowly — his 
brain seemed to be struggling to absorb yet another 
piece of shocking information. “Why did they release 
him?” 

“He did a deal with the Ministry of Magic,” said Sirius 
bitterly. “He said he’d seen the error of his ways, and 
then he named names ... he put a load of other people 
into Azkaban in his place. ... He’s not very popular in 
there, I can tell you. And since he got out, from what I 
Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




can tell, he’s been teaching the Dark Arts to every 
student who passes through that school of his. So 
watch out for the Durmstrang champion as well.” 

“Okay,” said Harry slowly. “But ... are you saying 
Karkaroff put my name in the goblet? Because if he 
did, he’s a really good actor. He seemed furious about 
it. He wanted to stop me from competing.” 

“We know he’s a good actor,” said Sirius, “because he 
convinced the Ministry of Magic to set him free, didn’t 
he? Now, I’ve been keeping an eye on the Daily 
Prophet, Harry — ” 

“ — you and the rest of the world,” said Harry bitterly. 

“ — and reading between the lines of that Skeeter 
woman’s article last month, Moody was attacked the 
night before he started at Hogwarts. Yes, I know she 
says it was another false alarm,” Sirius said hastily, 
seeing Harry about to speak, “but I don’t think so, 
somehow. I think someone tried to stop him from 
getting to Hogwarts. I think someone knew their job 
would be a lot more difficult with him around. And no 
one’s going to look into it too closely; Mad-Eye’s heard 
intruders a bit too often. But that doesn’t mean he 
can’t still spot the real thing. Moody was the best 
Auror the Ministry ever had.” 

“So . . . what are you saying?” said Harry slowly. 
“Karkaroff’s trying to kill me? But — why?” 

Sirius hesitated. 

“I’ve been hearing some very strange things,” he said 
slowly. “The Death Eaters seem to be a bit more active 
than usual lately. They showed themselves at the 
Quidditch World Cup, didn’t they? Someone set off 



Page | 368 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the Dark Mark . . . and then — did you hear about that 
Ministry of Magic witch who’s gone missing?” 

“Bertha Jorkins?” said Harry. 

“Exactly ... she disappeared in Albania, and that’s 
definitely where Voldemort was rumored to be last ... 
and she would have known the Triwizard Tournament 
was coming up, wouldn’t she?” 

“Yeah, but ... it’s not very likely she’d have walked 
straight into Voldemort, is it?” said Harry. 

“Listen, I knew Bertha Jorkins,” said Sirius grimly. 
“She was at Hogwarts when I was, a few years above 
your dad and me. And she was an idiot. Very nosy, 
but no brains, none at all. It’s not a good 
combination, Harry. I’d say she’d be very easy to lure 
into a trap. 

“So ... so Voldemort could have found out about the 
tournament?” said Harry. “Is that what you mean? 
You think Karkaroff might be here on his orders?” 

“I don’t know,” said Sirius slowly, “I just don’t know 
... Karkaroff doesn’t strike me as the type who’d go 
back to Voldemort unless he knew Voldemort was 
powerful enough to protect him. But whoever put 
your name in that goblet did it for a reason, and I 
can’t help thinking the tournament would be a very 
good way to attack you and make it look like an 
accident.” 

“Looks like a really good plan from where I’m 
standing,” said Harry grinning bleakly. “They’ll just 
have to stand back and let the dragons do their stuff.” 

“Right — these dragons,” said Sirius, speaking very 
quickly now. “There’s a way, Harry. Don’t be tempted 

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




to try a Stunning Spell — dragons are strong and too 
powerfully magical to be knocked out by a single 
Stunner, you need about half a dozen wizards at a 
time to overcome a dragon — ” 

“Yeah, I know, I just saw,” said Harry. 

“But you can do it alone,” said Sirius. “There is a way, 
and a simple spell’s all you need. Just — ” 

But Harry held up a hand to silence him, his heart 
suddenly pounding as though it would burst. He 
could hear footsteps coming down the spiral staircase 
behind him. 

“Go!” he hissed at Sirius. “Go! There’s someone 
coming!” 

Harry scrambled to his feet, hiding the fire — if 
someone saw Sirius’s face within the walls of 
Hogwarts, they would raise an almighty uproar — the 
Ministry would get dragged in — he, Harry, would be 
questioned about Sirius’s whereabouts — 

Harry heard a tiny pop\ in the fire behind him and 
knew Sirius had gone. He watched the bottom of the 
spiral staircase. Who had decided to go for a stroll at 
one o’clock in the morning, and stopped Sirius from 
telling him how to get past a dragon? 

It was Ron. Dressed in his maroon paisley pajamas, 
Ron stopped dead facing Harry across the room, and 
looked around. 

“Who were you talking to?” he said. 

“What’s that got to do with you?” Harry snarled. 

“What are you doing down here at this time of night?” 



Page | 370 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I just wondered where you — ” Ron broke off, 
shrugging. “Nothing. I’m going back to bed.” 

“Just thought you’d come nosing around, did you?” 
Harry shouted. He knew that Ron had no idea what 
he’d walked in on, knew he hadn’t done it on purpose, 
but he didn’t care — at this moment he hated 
everything about Ron, right down to the several 
inches of bare ankle showing beneath his pajama 
trousers. 

“Sorry about that,” said Ron, his face reddening with 
anger. “Should’ve realized you didn’t want to be 
disturbed. I’ll let you get on with practicing for your 
next interview in peace.” 

Harry seized one of the POTTER REALLY STINKS 
badges off the table and chucked it, as hard as he 
could, across the room. It hit Ron on the forehead 
and bounced off. 

“There you go,” Harry said. “Something for you to 
wear on Tuesday. You might even have a scar now, if 
you’re lucky. ... That’s what you want, isn’t it?” 

He strode across the room toward the stairs; he half 
expected Ron to stop him, he would even have liked 
Ron to throw a punch at him, but Ron just stood 
there in his too-small pajamas, and Harry, having 
stormed upstairs, lay awake in bed fuming for a long 
time afterward and didn’t hear him come up to bed. 



Page | 371 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE FIRST TASK 

Harry got up on Sunday morning and dressed so 
inattentively that it was a while before he realized he 
was trying to pull his hat onto his foot instead of his 
sock. When he’d finally got all his clothes on the right 
parts of his body, he hurried off to find Hermione, 
locating her at the Gryffindor table in the Great Hall, 
where she was eating breakfast with Ginny. Feeling 
too queasy to eat, Harry waited until Hermione had 
swallowed her last spoonful of porridge, then dragged 
her out onto the grounds. There, he told her all about 
the dragons, and about everything Sirius had said, 
while they took another long walk around the lake. 

Alarmed as she was by Sirius’s warnings about 
Karkaroff, Hermione still thought that the dragons 
were the more pressing problem. 

“Let’s just try and keep you alive until Tuesday 
evening,” she said desperately, “and then we can 
worry about Karkaroff.” 



Page | 372 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



They walked three times around the lake, trying all 
the way to think of a simple spell that would subdue 
a dragon. Nothing whatsoever occurred to them, so 
they retired to the library instead. Here, Harry pulled 
down every book he could find on dragons, and both 
of them set to work searching through the large pile. 

“ ‘Talon-clipping by charms ... treating scale-rot ...’ 

This is no good, this is for nutters like Hagrid who 
want to keep them healthy. ...” 

“ ‘Dragons are extremely difficult to slay, owing to the 
ancient magic that imbues their thick hides, which 
none but the most powerful spells can penetrate ...’ 

But Sirius said a simple one would do it. ...” 

“Let’s try some simple spellbooks, then,” said Harry, 
throwing aside Men Who Love Dragons Too Much. 

He returned to the table with a pile of spellbooks, set 
them down, and began to flick through each in turn, 
Hermione whispering nonstop at his elbow. 

“Well, there are Switching Spells ... but what’s the 
point of Switching it? Unless you swapped its fangs 
for wine-gums or something that would make it less 
dangerous. ... The trouble is, like that book said, not 
much is going to get through a dragon’s hide. ... I’d 
say Transfigure it, but something that big, you really 
haven’t got a hope, I doubt even Professor McGonagall 
... unless you’re supposed to put the spell on 
yourself? Maybe to give yourself extra powers? But 
they’re not simple spells, I mean, we haven’t done any 
of those in class, I only know about them because I’ve 
been doing O.W.L. practice papers. ...” 

“Hermione,” Harry said, through gritted teeth, “will 
you shut up for a bit, please? I’m trying to 
concentrate.” 

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But all that happened, when Hermione fell silent, was 
that Harry’s brain filled with a sort of blank buzzing, 
which didn’t seem to allow room for concentration. He 
stared hopelessly down the index of Basic Hexes for 
the Busy and Vexed. Instant scalping . . . but dragons 
had no hair . . . pepper breath . . . that would probably 
increase a dragon’s firepower ... horn tongue ... just 
what he needed, to give it an extra weapon . . . 

“Oh no, he’s back again, why can’t he read on his 
stupid ship?” said Hermione irritably as Viktor Krum 
slouched in, cast a surly look over at the pair of them, 
and settled himself in a distant corner with a pile of 
books. “Come on, Harry, we’ll go back to the common 
room ... his fan club’ll be here in a moment, twittering 
away. ...” 

And sure enough, as they left the library, a gang of 
girls tiptoed past them, one of them wearing a 
Bulgaria scarf tied around her waist. 

Harry barely slept that night. When he awoke on 
Monday morning, he seriously considered for the first 
time ever just running away from Hogwarts. But as 
he looked around the Great Hall at breakfast time, 
and thought about what leaving the castle would 
mean, he knew he couldn’t do it. It was the only place 
he had ever been happy . . . well, he supposed he must 
have been happy with his parents too, but he couldn’t 
remember that. 

Somehow, the knowledge that he would rather be 
here and facing a dragon than back on Privet Drive 
with Dudley was good to know; it made him feel 
slightly calmer. He finished his bacon with difficulty 
(his throat wasn’t working too well), and as he and 
Hermione got up, he saw Cedric Diggory leaving the 
Hufflepuff table. 



Page | 374 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Cedric still didn’t know about the dragons ... the only 
champion who didn’t, if Harry was right in thinking 
that Maxime and Karkaroff would have told Fleur and 
Krum. ... 

“Hermione, I’ll see you in the greenhouses,” Harry 
said, coming to his decision as he watched Cedric 
leaving the Hall. “Go on, I’ll catch you up.” 

“Harry, you’ll be late, the bell’s about to ring — ” 

“I’ll catch you up, okay?” 

By the time Harry reached the bottom of the marble 
staircase, Cedric was at the top. He was with a load of 
sixth-year friends. Harry didn’t want to talk to Cedric 
in front of them; they were among those who had 
been quoting Rita Skeeter’s article at him every time 
he went near them. He followed Cedric at a distance 
and saw that he was heading toward the Charms 
corridor. This gave Harry an idea. Pausing at a 
distance from them, he pulled out his wand, and took 
careful aim. 

“Diffindol” 

Cedric’s bag split. Parchment, quills, and books 
spilled out of it onto the floor. Several bottles of ink 
smashed. 

“Don’t bother,” said Cedric in an exasperated voice as 
his friends bent down to help him. “Tell Flitwick I’m 
coming, go on. ...” 

This was exactly what Harry had been hoping for. He 
slipped his wand back into his robes, waited until 
Cedric’s friends had disappeared into their classroom, 
and hurried up the corridor, which was now empty of 
everyone but himself and Cedric. 

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Hi,” said Cedric, picking up a copy of A Guide to 
Advanced Transfiguration that was now splattered 
with ink. “My bag just split ... brand-new and all ...” 

“Cedric,” said Harry, “the first task is dragons.” 

“What?” said Cedric, looking up. 

“Dragons,” said Harry, speaking quickly, in case 
Professor Flitwick came out to see where Cedric had 
got to. “They’ve got four, one for each of us, and we’ve 
got to get past them.” 

Cedric stared at him. Harry saw some of the panic 
he’d been feeling since Saturday night flickering in 
Cedric’s gray eyes. 

“Are you sure?” Cedric said in a hushed voice. 

“Dead sure,” said Harry. “I’ve seen them.” 

“But how did you find out? We’re not supposed to 
know. ...” 

“Never mind,” said Harry quickly — he knew Hagrid 
would be in trouble if he told the truth. “But I’m not 
the only one who knows. Fleur and Krum will know 
by now — Maxime and Karkaroff both saw the 
dragons too.” 

Cedric straightened up, his arms full of inky quills, 
parchment, and books, his ripped bag dangling off 
one shoulder. He stared at Harry, and there was a 
puzzled, almost suspicious look in his eyes. 

“Why are you telling me?” he asked. 

Harry looked at him in disbelief. He was sure Cedric 
wouldn’t have asked that if he had seen the dragons 

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




himself. Harry wouldn’t have let his worst enemy face 
those monsters unprepared — well, perhaps Malfoy or 
Snape ... 

“It’s just ... fair, isn’t it?” he said to Cedric. “We all 
know now ... we’re on an even footing, aren’t we?” 

Cedric was still looking at him in a slightly suspicious 
way when Harry heard a familiar clunking noise 
behind him. He turned around and saw Mad-Eye 
Moody emerging from a nearby classroom. 

“Come with me, Potter,” he growled. “Diggory, off you 
go.” 

Harry stared apprehensively at Moody. Had he 
overheard them? 

“Er — Professor, I’m supposed to be in Herbology — ” 

“Never mind that, Potter. In my office, please. ...” 

Harry followed him, wondering what was going to 
happen to him now. What if Moody wanted to know 
how he’d found out about the dragons? Would Moody 
go to Dumbledore and tell on Hagrid, or just turn 
Harry into a ferret? Well, it might be easier to get past 
a dragon if he were a ferret, Harry thought dully, he’d 
be smaller, much less easy to see from a height of fifty 
feet ... 

He followed Moody into his office. Moody closed the 
door behind them and turned to look at Harry, his 
magical eye fixed upon him as well as the normal one. 

“That was a very decent thing you just did, Potter,” 
Moody said quietly. 



Page | 377 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry didn’t know what to say; this wasn’t the 
reaction he had expected at all. 



“Sit down,” said Moody, and Harry sat, looking 
around. 

He had visited this office under two of its previous 
occupants. In Professor Lockhart’s day, the walls had 
been plastered with beaming, winking pictures of 
Professor Lockhart himself. When Lupin had lived 
here, you were more likely to come across a specimen 
of some fascinating new Dark creature he had 
procured for them to study in class. Now, however, 
the office was full of a number of exceptionally odd 
objects that Harry supposed Moody had used in the 
days when he had been an Auror. 

On his desk stood what looked like a large, cracked, 
glass spinning top; Harry recognized it at once as a 
Sneakoscope, because he owned one himself, though 
it was much smaller than Moody’s. In the corner on a 
small table stood an object that looked something like 
an extra- squiggly, golden television aerial. It was 
humming slightly. What appeared to be a mirror hung 
opposite Harry on the wall, but it was not reflecting 
the room. Shadowy figures were moving around 
inside it, none of them clearly in focus. 

“Like my Dark Detectors, do you?” said Moody, who 
was watching Harry closely. 

“What’s that?” Harry asked, pointing at the squiggly 
golden aerial. 

“Secrecy Sensor. Vibrates when it detects 
concealment and lies ... no use here, of course, too 
much interference — students in every direction lying 
about why they haven’t done their homework. Been 
humming ever since I got here. I had to disable my 
Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Sneakoscope because it wouldn’t stop whistling. It’s 
extra-sensitive, picks up stuff about a mile around. Of 
course, it could be picking up more than kid stuff,” he 
added in a growl. 

“And what’s the mirror for?” 

“Oh that’s my Foe-Glass. See them out there, 
skulking around? I’m not really in trouble until I see 
the whites of their eyes. That’s when I open my 
trunk.” 

He let out a short, harsh laugh, and pointed to the 
large trunk under the window. It had seven keyholes 
in a row. Harry wondered what was in there, until 
Moody’s next question brought him sharply back to 
earth. 

“So ... found out about the dragons, have you?” 

Harry hesitated. He’d been afraid of this — but he 
hadn’t told Cedric, and he certainly wasn’t going to 
tell Moody, that Hagrid had broken the rules. 

“It’s all right,” said Moody, sitting down and 
stretching out his wooden leg with a groan. 

“Cheating’s a traditional part of the Tri-wizard 
Tournament and always has been.” 

“I didn’t cheat,” said Harry sharply. “It was — a sort 
of accident that I found out.” 

Moody grinned. “I wasn’t accusing you, laddie. I’ve 
been telling Dumbledore from the start, he can be as 
high-minded as he likes, but you can bet old 
Karkaroff and Maxime won’t be. They’ll have told their 
champions everything they can. They want to win. 
They want to beat Dumbledore. They’d like to prove 
he’s only human.” 

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody gave another harsh laugh, and his magical eye 
swiveled around so fast it made Harry feel queasy to 
watch it. 

“So ... got any ideas how you’re going to get past your 
dragon yet?” said Moody. 

“No,” said Harry. 

“Well, I’m not going to tell you,” said Moody gruffly. “I 
don’t show favoritism, me. I’m just going to give you 
some good, general advice. And the first bit is — play 
to your strengths.” 

“I haven’t got any,” said Harry, before he could stop 
himself. 

“Excuse me,” growled Moody, “you’ve got strengths if I 
say you’ve got them. Think now. What are you best 
at?” 

Harry tried to concentrate. What was he best at? 

Well, that was easy, really — 

“Quidditch,” he said dully, “and a fat lot of help — ” 

“That’s right,” said Moody, staring at him very hard, 
his magical eye barely moving at all. “You’re a damn 
good flier from what I’ve heard.” 

“Yeah, but ...” Harry stared at him. “I’m not allowed a 
broom, I’ve only got my wand — ” 

“My second piece of general advice,” said Moody 
loudly, interrupting him, “is to use a nice, simple 
spell that will enable you to get what you need.” 

Harry looked at him blankly. What did he need? 



Page | 380 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, boy ...” whispered Moody. “Put them 
together ... it’s not that difficult. ...” 

And it clicked. He was best at flying. He needed to 
pass the dragon in the air. For that, he needed his 
Firebolt. And for his Firebolt, he needed — 

“Hermione,” Harry whispered, when he had sped into 
greenhouse three minutes later, uttering a hurried 
apology to Professor Sprout as he passed her. 
“Hermione — I need you to help me.” 

“What d’you think I’ve been trying to do, Harry?” she 
whispered back, her eyes round with anxiety over the 
top of the quivering Flutterby Bush she was pruning. 

“Hermione, I need to learn how to do a Summoning 
Charm properly by tomorrow afternoon.” 

And so they practiced. They didn’t have lunch, but 
headed for a free classroom, where Harry tried with 
all his might to make various objects fly across the 
room toward him. He was still having problems. The 
books and quills kept losing heart halfway across the 
room and dropping like stones to the floor. 

“Concentrate, Harry, concentrate. ...” 

“What d’you think I’m trying to do?” said Harry 
angrily. “A great big dragon keeps popping up in my 
head for some reason. ... Okay, try again. ...” 

He wanted to skip Divination to keep practicing, but 
Hermione refused point-blank to skive off 
Arithmancy, and there was no point in staying 
without her. He therefore had to endure over an hour 
of Professor Trelawney, who spent half the lesson 
telling everyone that the position of Mars with relation 



Page | 381 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




to Saturn at that moment meant that people born in 
July were in great danger of sudden, violent deaths. 

“Well, that’s good,” said Harry loudly, his temper 
getting the better of him, “just as long as it’s not 
drawn-out. I don’t want to suffer.” 

Ron looked for a moment as though he was going to 
laugh; he certainly caught Harry’s eye for the first 
time in days, but Harry was still feeling too resentful 
toward Ron to care. He spent the rest of the lesson 
trying to attract small objects toward him under the 
table with his wand. He managed to make a fly zoom 
straight into his hand, though he wasn’t entirely sure 
that was his prowess at Summoning Charms — 
perhaps the fly was just stupid. 

He forced down some dinner after Divination, then 
returned to the empty classroom with Hermione, 
using the Invisibility Cloak to avoid the teachers. 

They kept practicing until past midnight. They would 
have stayed longer, but Peeves turned up and, 
pretending to think that Harry wanted things thrown 
at him, started chucking chairs across the room. 
Harry and Hermione left in a hurry before the noise 
attracted Filch, and went back to the Gryffindor 
common room, which was now mercifully empty. 

At two o’clock in the morning, Harry stood near the 
fireplace, surrounded by heaps of objects: books, 
quills, several upturned chairs, an old set of 
Gobstones, and Neville’s toad, Trevor. Only in the last 
hour had Harry really got the hang of the Summoning 
Charm. 

“That’s better, Harry, that’s loads better,” Hermione 
said, looking exhausted but very pleased. 



Page | 382 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, now we know what to do next time I can’t 
manage a spell,” Harry said, throwing a rune 
dictionary back to Hermione, so he could try again, 
“threaten me with a dragon. Right ...” He raised his 
wand once more. “Accio Dictionary !” 

The heavy book soared out of Hermione ’s hand, flew 
across the room, and Harry caught it. 

“Harry, I really think you’ve got it!” said Hermione 
delightedly. 

“Just as long as it works tomorrow,” Harry said. “The 
Firebolt’s going to be much farther away than the 
stuff in here, it’s going to be in the castle, and I’m 
going to be out there on the grounds. ...” 

“That doesn’t matter,” said Hermione firmly “Just as 
long as you’re concentrating really, really hard on it, 
it’ll come. Harry, we’d better get some sleep ... you’re 
going to need it.” 

Harry had been focusing so hard on learning the 
Summoning Charm that evening that some of his 
blind panic had left him. It returned in full measure, 
however, on the following morning. The atmosphere 
in the school was one of great tension and excitement. 
Lessons were to stop at midday, giving all the 
students time to get down to the dragons’ enclosure 
— though of course, they didn’t yet know what they 
would find there. 

Harry felt oddly separate from everyone around him, 
whether they were wishing him good luck or hissing 
“ We’ll have a box of tissues ready, Potted as he 
passed. It was a state of nervousness so advanced 
that he wondered whether he mightn’t just lose his 
head when they tried to lead him out to his dragon, 
and start trying to curse everyone in sight. Time was 
Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




behaving in a more peculiar fashion than ever, 
rushing past in great dollops, so that one moment he 
seemed to be sitting down in his first lesson, History 
of Magic, and the next, walking into lunch . . . and 
then (where had the morning gone? the last of the 
dragon-free hours?), Professor McGonagall was 
hurrying over to him in the Great Hall. Lots of people 
were watching. 

“Potter, the champions have to come down onto the 
grounds now. ... You have to get ready for your first 
task.” 

“Okay,” said Harry, standing up, his fork falling onto 
his plate with a clatter. 

“Good luck, Harry,” Hermione whispered. “You’ll be 
fine!” 

“Yeah,” said Harry in a voice that was most unlike his 
own. 

He left the Great Hall with Professor McGonagall. She 
didn’t seem herself either; in fact, she looked nearly 
as anxious as Hermione. As she walked him down the 
stone steps and out into the cold November afternoon, 
she put her hand on his shoulder. 

“Now, don’t panic,” she said, “just keep a cool head. 

... We’ve got wizards standing by to control the 
situation if it gets out of hand. ... The main thing is 
just to do your best, and nobody will think any the 
worse of you. ... Are you all right?” 

“Yes,” Harry heard himself say. “Yes, I’m fine.” 

She was leading him toward the place where the 
dragons were, around the edge of the forest, but when 
they approached the clump of trees behind which the 

Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




enclosure would be clearly visible, Harry saw that a 
tent had been erected, its entrance facing them, 
screening the dragons from view. 

“You’re to go in here with the other champions,” said 
Professor McGonagall, in a rather shaky sort of voice, 
“and wait for your turn, Potter. Mr. Bagman is in 
there ... he’ll be telling you the — the procedure. ... 
Good luck.” 

“Thanks,” said Harry, in a flat, distant voice. She left 
him at the entrance of the tent. Harry went inside. 

Fleur Delacour was sitting in a corner on a low 
wooden stool. She didn’t look nearly as composed as 
usual, but rather pale and clammy. Viktor Krum 
looked even surlier than usual, which Harry 
supposed was his way of showing nerves. Cedric was 
pacing up and down. When Harry entered, Cedric 
gave him a small smile, which Harry returned, feeling 
the muscles in his face working rather hard, as 
though they had forgotten how to do it. 

“Harry! Good-o!” said Bagman happily, looking 
around at him. “Come in, come in, make yourself at 
home!” 

Bagman looked somehow like a slightly overblown 
cartoon figure, standing amid all the pale-faced 
champions. He was wearing his old Wasp robes again. 

“Well, now we’re all here — time to fill you in!” said 
Bagman brightly. “When the audience has assembled, 
I’m going to be offering each of you this bag” — he 
held up a small sack of purple silk and shook it at 
them — “from which you will each select a small 
model of the thing you are about to face! There are 
different — er — varieties, you see. And I have to tell 



Page | 385 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you something else too . . . ah, yes . . . your task is to 
collect the golden egg\” 

Harry glanced around. Cedric had nodded once, to 
show that he understood Bagman’s words, and then 
started pacing around the tent again; he looked 
slightly green. Fleur Delacour and Krum hadn’t 
reacted at all. Perhaps they thought they might be 
sick if they opened their mouths; that was certainly 
how Harry felt. But they, at least, had volunteered for 
this. ... 

And in no time at all, hundreds upon hundreds of 
pairs of feet could be heard passing the tent, their 
owners talking excitedly, laughing, joking. ... Harry 
felt as separate from the crowd as though they were a 
different species. And then — it seemed like about a 
second later to Harry — Bagman was opening the 
neck of the purple silk sack. 

“Ladies first,” he said, offering it to Fleur Delacour. 

She put a shaking hand inside the bag and drew out 
a tiny, perfect model of a dragon — a Welsh Green. It 
had the number two around its neck. And Harry 
knew, by the fact that Fleur showed no sign of 
surprise, but rather a determined resignation, that he 
had been right: Madame Maxime had told her what 
was coming. 

The same held true for Krum. He pulled out the 
scarlet Chinese Fireball. It had a number three 
around its neck. He didn’t even blink, just sat back 
down and stared at the ground. 

Cedric put his hand into the bag, and out came the 
blueish-gray Swedish Short-Snout, the number one 
tied around its neck. Knowing what was left, Harry 
put his hand into the silk bag and pulled out the 

Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hungarian Horntail, and the number four. It 
stretched its wings as he looked down at it, and bared 
its minuscule fangs. 

“Well, there you are!” said Bagman. “You have each 
pulled out the dragon you will face, and the numbers 
refer to the order in which you are to take on the 
dragons, do you see? Now, I’m going to have to leave 
you in a moment, because I’m commentating. Mr. 
Diggory, you’re first, just go out into the enclosure 
when you hear a whistle, all right? Now ... Harry ... 
could I have a quick word? Outside?” 

“Er ... yes,” said Harry blankly, and he got up and 
went out of the tent with Bagman, who walked him a 
short distance away, into the trees, and then turned 
to him with a fatherly expression on his face. 

“Feeling all right, Harry? Anything I can get you?” 

“What?” said Harry. “I — no, nothing.” 

“Got a plan?” said Bagman, lowering his voice 
conspiratorially. “Because I don’t mind sharing a few 
pointers, if you’d like them, you know. I mean,” 
Bagman continued, lowering his voice still further, 
“you’re the underdog here, Harry. ... Anything I can 
do to help ...” 

“No,” said Harry so quickly he knew he had sounded 
rude, “no — I — I know what I’m going to do, thanks.” 

“Nobody would know, Harry,” said Bagman, winking 
at him. 

“No, I’m fine,” said Harry, wondering why he kept 
telling people this, and wondering whether he had 
ever been less fine. “I’ve got a plan worked out, I — ” 



Page | 387 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A whistle had blown somewhere. 



“Good lord, I’ve got to run!” said Bagman in alarm, 
and he hurried off. 

Harry walked back to the tent and saw Cedric 
emerging from it, greener than ever. Harry tried to 
wish him luck as he walked past, but all that came 
out of his mouth was a sort of hoarse grunt. 

Harry went back inside to Fleur and Krum. Seconds 
later, they heard the roar of the crowd, which meant 
Cedric had entered the enclosure and was now face- 
to-face with the living counterpart of his model. ... 

It was worse than Harry could ever have imagined, 
sitting there and listening. The crowd screamed . . . 
yelled . . . gasped like a single many-headed entity, as 
Cedric did whatever he was doing to get past the 
Swedish Short-Snout. Krum was still staring at the 
ground. Fleur had now taken to retracing Cedric’s 
steps, around and around the tent. And Bagman’s 
commentary made everything much, much worse. ... 
Horrible pictures formed in Harry’s mind as he heard: 
“Oooh, narrow miss there, very narrow” ... “He’s 
taking risks, this one!” ... “Clever move — pity it 
didn’t work!” 

And then, after about fifteen minutes, Harry heard 
the deafening roar that could mean only one thing: 
Cedric had gotten past his dragon and captured the 
golden egg. 

“Very good indeed!” Bagman was shouting. “And now 
the marks from the judges!” 

But he didn’t shout out the marks; Harry supposed 
the judges were holding them up and showing them 
to the crowd. 

Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“One down, three to go!” Bagman yelled as the whistle 
blew again. “Miss Delacour, if you please!” 



Fleur was trembling from head to foot; Harry felt more 
warmly toward her than he had done so far as she left 
the tent with her head held high and her hand 
clutching her wand. He and Krum were left alone, at 
opposite sides of the tent, avoiding each other’s gaze. 

The same process started again. ... “Oh I’m not sure 
that was wise!” they could hear Bagman shouting 
gleefully. “Oh . . . nearly! Careful now . . . good lord, I 
thought she’d had it then!” 

Ten minutes later, Harry heard the crowd erupt into 
applause once more. ... Fleur must have been 
successful too. A pause, while Fleur’s marks were 
being shown . . . more clapping . . . then, for the third 
time, the whistle. 

“And here comes Mr. Krum!” cried Bagman, and 
Krum slouched out, leaving Harry quite alone. 

He felt much more aware of his body than usual; very 
aware of the way his heart was pumping fast, and his 
fingers tingling with fear ... yet at the same time, he 
seemed to be outside himself, seeing the walls of the 
tent, and hearing the crowd, as though from far away. 



“Very daring!” Bagman was yelling, and Harry heard 
the Chinese Fireball emit a horrible, roaring shriek, 
while the crowd drew its collective breath. “That’s 
some nerve he’s showing — and — yes, he’s got the 
egg!” 

Applause shattered the wintery air like breaking 
glass; Krum had finished — it would be Harry’s turn 
any moment. 

Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He stood up, noticing dimly that his legs seemed to be 
made of marshmallow. He waited. And then he heard 
the whistle blow. He walked out through the entrance 
of the tent, the panic rising into a crescendo inside 
him. And now he was walking past the trees, through 
a gap in the enclosure fence. 

He saw everything in front of him as though it was a 
very highly colored dream. There were hundreds and 
hundreds of faces staring down at him from stands 
that had been magicked there since he’d last stood on 
this spot. And there was the Horntail, at the other 
end of the enclosure, crouched low over her clutch of 
eggs, her wings half-furled, her evil, yellow eyes upon 
him, a monstrous, scaly, black lizard, thrashing her 
spiked tail, leaving yard-long gouge marks in the hard 
ground. The crowd was making a great deal of noise, 
but whether friendly or not, Harry didn’t know or 
care. It was time to do what he had to do ... to focus 
his mind, entirely and absolutely, upon the thing that 
was his only chance. ... 

He raised his wand. 

“Accio Firebolti” he shouted. 

Harry waited, every fiber of him hoping, praying. ... If 
it hadn’t worked ... if it wasn’t coming ... He seemed 
to be looking at everything around him through some 
sort of shimmering, transparent barrier, like a heat 
haze, which made the enclosure and the hundreds of 
faces around him swim strangely. ... 

And then he heard it, speeding through the air behind 
him; he turned and saw his Firebolt hurtling toward 
him around the edge of the woods, soaring into the 
enclosure, and stopping dead in midair beside him, 
waiting for him to mount. The crowd was making 
even more noise. ... Bagman was shouting something 
Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




... but Harry’s ears were not working properly 
anymore ... listening wasn’t important. ... 

He swung his leg over the broom and kicked off from 
the ground. And a second later, something 
miraculous happened. ... 

As he soared upward, as the wind rushed through his 
hair, as the crowd’s faces became mere flesh-colored 
pinpricks below, and the Horntail shrank to the size 
of a dog, he realized that he had left not only the 
ground behind, but also his fear. . . . He was back 
where he belonged. ... 

This was just another Quidditch match, that was all 
... just another Quidditch match, and that Horntail 
was just another ugly opposing team. ... 

He looked down at the clutch of eggs and spotted the 
gold one, gleaming against its cement-colored fellows, 
residing safely between the dragon’s front legs. 
“Okay,” Harry told himself, “diversionary tactics ... 
let’s go. ...” 

He dived. The Horntail’s head followed him; he knew 
what it was going to do and pulled out of the dive just 
in time; a jet of fire had been released exactly where 
he would have been had he not swerved away . . . but 
Harry didn’t care ... that was no more than dodging a 
Bludger. ... 

“Great Scott, he can fly!” yelled Bagman as the crowd 
shrieked and gasped. “Are you watching this, Mr. 
Krum?” 

Harry soared higher in a circle; the Horntail was still 
following his progress; its head revolving on its long 
neck — if he kept this up, it would be nicely dizzy — 



Page | 391 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




but better not push it too long, or it would be 
breathing fire again — 

Harry plummeted just as the Horntail opened its 
mouth, but this time he was less lucky — he missed 
the flames, but the tail came whipping up to meet 
him instead, and as he swerved to the left, one of the 
long spikes grazed his shoulder, ripping his robes — 

He could feel it stinging, he could hear screaming and 
groans from the crowd, but the cut didn’t seem to be 
deep. ... Now he zoomed around the back of the 
Horntail, and a possibility occurred to him. ... 

The Horntail didn’t seem to want to take off, she was 
too protective of her eggs. Though she writhed and 
twisted, furling and unfurling her wings and keeping 
those fearsome yellow eyes on Harry, she was afraid 
to move too far from them . . . but he had to persuade 
her to do it, or he’d never get near them. ... The trick 
was to do it carefully, gradually. . . . 

He began to fly, first this way, then the other, not 
near enough to make her breathe fire to stave him off, 
but still posing a sufficient threat to ensure she kept 
her eyes on him. Her head swayed this way and that, 
watching him out of those vertical pupils, her fangs 
bared. ... 

He flew higher. The Horntail’s head rose with him, her 
neck now stretched to its fullest extent, still swaying, 
like a snake before its charmer. . . . 

Harry rose a few more feet, and she let out a roar of 
exasperation. He was like a fly to her, a fly she was 
longing to swat; her tail thrashed again, but he was 
too high to reach now. ... She shot fire into the air, 
which he dodged. ... Her jaws opened wide. ... 



Page | 392 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on,” Harry hissed, swerving tantalizingly above 
her, “come on, come and get me ... up you get now ...” 

And then she reared, spreading her great, black, 
leathery wings at last, as wide as those of a small 
airplane — and Harry dived. Before the dragon knew 
what he had done, or where he had disappeared to, 
he was speeding toward the ground as fast as he 
could go, toward the eggs now unprotected by her 
clawed front legs — he had taken his hands off his 
Firebolt — he had seized the golden egg — 

And with a huge spurt of speed, he was off, he was 
soaring out over the stands, the heavy egg safely 
under his uninjured arm, and it was as though 
somebody had just turned the volume back up — for 
the first time, he became properly aware of the noise 
of the crowd, which was screaming and applauding as 
loudly as the Irish supporters at the World Cup — 

“Look at that!” Bagman was yelling. “Will you look at 
that! Our youngest champion is quickest to get his 
egg! Well, this is going to shorten the odds on Mr. 
Potter!” 

Harry saw the dragon keepers rushing forward to 
subdue the Horntail, and, over at the entrance to the 
enclosure, Professor McGonagall, Professor Moody, 
and Hagrid hurrying to meet him, all of them waving 
him toward them, their smiles evident even from this 
distance. He flew back over the stands, the noise of 
the crowd pounding his eardrums, and came in 
smoothly to land, his heart lighter than it had been in 
weeks. ... He had got through the first task, he had 
survived. ... 

“That was excellent, Potter!” cried Professor 
McGonagall as he got off the Firebolt — which from 
her was extravagant praise. He noticed that her hand 

Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




shook as she pointed at his shoulder. “You’ll need to 
see Madam Pomfrey before the judges give out your 
score. ... Over there, she’s had to mop up Diggory 
already. ...” 

“Yeh did it, Harry!” said Hagrid hoarsely. “Yeh did it! 
An’ agains’ the Horntail an’ all, an’ yeh know Charlie 
said that was the wors’ — ” 

“Thanks, Hagrid,” said Harry loudly, so that Hagrid 
wouldn’t blunder on and reveal that he had shown 
Harry the dragons beforehand. 

Professor Moody looked very pleased too; his magical 
eye was dancing in its socket. 

“Nice and easy does the trick, Potter,” he growled. 

“Right then, Potter, the first aid tent, please ...” said 
Professor McGonagall. 

Harry walked out of the enclosure, still panting, and 
saw Madam Pomfrey standing at the mouth of a 
second tent, looking worried. 

“Dragons!” she said, in a disgusted tone, pulling 
Harry inside. The tent was divided into cubicles; he 
could make out Cedric’s shadow through the canvas, 
but Cedric didn’t seem to be badly injured; he was 
sitting up, at least. Madam Pomfrey examined Harry’s 
shoulder, talking furiously all the while. “Last year 
dementors, this year dragons, what are they going to 
bring into this school next? You’re very lucky ... this 
is quite shallow ... it’ll need cleaning before I heal it 
up, though. ...” 

She cleaned the cut with a dab of some purple liquid 
that smoked and stung, but then poked his shoulder 
with her wand, and he felt it heal instantly. 

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Now, just sit quietly for a minute — sit! And then you 
can go and get your score.” 

She bustled out of the tent and he heard her go next 
door and say, “How does it feel now, Diggory?” 

Harry didn’t want to sit still: He was too full of 
adrenaline. He got to his feet, wanting to see what 
was going on outside, but before he’d reached the 
mouth of the tent, two people had come darting inside 
— Hermione, followed closely by Ron. 

“Harry, you were brilliant!” Hermione said squeakily. 
There were fingernail marks on her face where she 
had been clutching it in fear. “You were amazing! You 
really were!” 

But Harry was looking at Ron, who was very white 
and staring at Harry as though he were a ghost. 

“Harry,” he said, very seriously, “whoever put your 
name in that goblet — I — I reckon they’re trying to 
do you in!” 

It was as though the last few weeks had never 
happened — as though Harry were meeting Ron for 
the first time, right after he’d been made champion. 

“Caught on, have you?” said Harry coldly. “Took you 
long enough.” 

Hermione stood nervously between them, looking 
from one to the other. Ron opened his mouth 
uncertainly. Harry knew Ron was about to apologize 
and suddenly he found he didn’t need to hear it. 

“It’s okay,” he said, before Ron could get the words 
out. “Forget it.” 



Page | 395 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Ron, “I shouldn’t’ve — ” 



“ Forget it,” Harry said. 

Ron grinned nervously at him, and Harry grinned 
back. 

Hermione burst into tears. 

“There’s nothing to cry about!” Harry told her, 
bewildered. 

“You two are so stupid).” she shouted, stamping her 
foot on the ground, tears splashing down her front. 
Then, before either of them could stop her, she had 
given both of them a hug and dashed away, now 
positively howling. 

“Barking mad,” said Ron, shaking his head. “Harry, 
c’mon, they’ll be putting up your scores. ...” 

Picking up the golden egg and his Firebolt, feeling 
more elated than he would have believed possible an 
hour ago, Harry ducked out of the tent, Ron by his 
side, talking fast. 

“You were the best, you know, no competition. Cedric 
did this weird thing where he Transfigured a rock on 
the ground . . . turned it into a dog ... he was trying to 
make the dragon go for the dog instead of him. Well, 
it was a pretty cool bit of Transfiguration, and it sort 
of worked, because he did get the egg, but he got 
burned as well — the dragon changed its mind 
halfway through and decided it would rather have 
him than the Labrador; he only just got away. And 
that Fleur girl tried this sort of charm, I think she 
was trying to put it into a trance — well, that kind of 
worked too, it went all sleepy, but then it snored, and 
this great jet of flame shot out, and her skirt caught 
Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




fire — she put it out with a bit of water out of her 
wand. And Krum — you won’t believe this, but he 
didn’t even think of flying! He was probably the best 
after you, though. Hit it with some sort of spell right 
in the eye. Only thing is, it went trampling around in 
agony and squashed half the real eggs — they took 
marks off for that, he wasn’t supposed to do any 
damage to them.” 

Ron drew breath as he and Harry reached the edge of 
the enclosure. Now that the Horntail had been taken 
away, Harry could see where the five judges were 
sitting — right at the other end, in raised seats 
draped in gold. 

“It’s marks out of ten from each one,” Ron said, and 
Harry, squinting up the field, saw the first judge — 
Madame Maxime — raise her wand in the air. What 
looked like a long silver ribbon shot out of it, which 
twisted itself into a large figure eight. 

“Not bad!” said Ron as the crowd applauded. “I 
suppose she took marks off for your shoulder. ...” 

Mr. Crouch came next. He shot a number nine into 
the air. 

“Looking good!” Ron yelled, thumping Harry on the 
back. 

Next, Dumbledore. He too put up a nine. The crowd 
was cheering harder than ever. 

Ludo Bagman — ten. 

“Ten?” said Harry in disbelief. “But ... I got hurt. ... 
What’s he playing at?” 

“Harry, don’t complain!” Ron yelled excitedly. 

Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And now Karkaroff raised his wand. He paused for a 
moment, and then a number shot out of his wand too 
— four. 



“What?” Ron bellowed furiously. “Four? You lousy, 
biased scumbag, you gave Krum ten!” 

But Harry didn’t care, he wouldn’t have cared if 
Karkaroff had given him zero; Ron’s indignation on 
his behalf was worth about a hundred points to him. 
He didn’t tell Ron this, of course, but his heart felt 
lighter than air as he turned to leave the enclosure. 
And it wasn’t just Ron ... those weren’t only 
Gryffindors cheering in the crowd. When it had come 
to it, when they had seen what he was facing, most of 
the school had been on his side as well as Cedric’s. ... 
He didn’t care about the Slytherins, he could stand 
whatever they threw at him now. 

“You’re tied in first place, Harry! You and Krum!” said 
Charlie Weasley, hurrying to meet them as they set off 
back toward the school. “Listen, I’ve got to run, I’ve 
got to go and send Mum an owl, I swore I’d tell her 
what happened — but that was unbelievable! Oh yeah 
— and they told me to tell you you’ve got to hang 
around for a few more minutes. ... Bagman wants a 
word, back in the champions’ tent.” 

Ron said he would wait, so Harry reentered the tent, 
which somehow looked quite different now: friendly 
and welcoming. He thought back to how he’d felt 
while dodging the Horntail, and compared it to the 
long wait before he’d walked out to face it. ... There 
was no comparison; the wait had been immeasurably 
worse. 

Fleur, Cedric, and Krum all came in together. One 
side of Cedric’s face was covered in a thick orange 



Page | 398 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




paste, which was presumably mending his burn. He 
grinned at Harry when he saw him. 

“Good one, Harry.” 

“And you,” said Harry, grinning back. 

“Well done, all of you!” said Ludo Bagman, bouncing 
into the tent and looking as pleased as though he 
personally had just got past a dragon. “Now, just a 
quick few words. You’ve got a nice long break before 
the second task, which will take place at half past 
nine on the morning of February the twenty-fourth — 
but we’re giving you something to think about in the 
meantime! If you look down at those golden eggs 
you’re all holding, you will see that they open ... see 
the hinges there? You need to solve the clue inside 
the egg — because it will tell you what the second 
task is, and enable you to prepare for it! All clear? 
Sure? Well, off you go, then!” 

Harry left the tent, rejoined Ron, and they started to 
walk back around the edge of the forest, talking hard; 
Harry wanted to hear what the other champions had 
done in more detail. Then, as they rounded the clump 
of trees behind which Harry had first heard the 
dragons roar, a witch leapt out from behind them. 

It was Rita Skeeter. She was wearing acid-green robes 
today; the Quick-Quotes Quill in her hand blended 
perfectly against them. 

“Congratulations, Harry!” she said, beaming at him. “I 
wonder if you could give me a quick word? How you 
felt facing that dragon? How you feel now, about the 
fairness of the scoring?” 

“Yeah, you can have a word,” said Harry savagely. 
“Good-bye.” 

Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And he set off back to the castle with Ron. 



Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE HOUSE-ELF LIBERATION FRONT 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went up to the Owlery that 
evening to find Pigwidgeon, so that Harry could send 
Sirius a letter telling him that he had managed to get 
past his dragon unscathed. On the way, Harry filled 
Ron in on everything Sirius had told him about 
Karkaroff. Though shocked at first to hear that 
Karkaroff had been a Death Eater, by the time they 
entered the Owlery Ron was saying that they ought to 
have suspected it all along. 

“Fits, doesn’t it?” he said. “Remember what Malfoy 
said on the train, about his dad being friends with 
Karkaroff? Now we know where they knew each other. 
They were probably running around in masks 
together at the World Cup. ... I’ll tell you one thing, 
though, Harry, if it was Karkaroff who put your name 
in the goblet, he’s going to be feeling really stupid 
now, isn’t he? Didn’t work, did it? You only got a 
scratch! Come here — I’ll do it — ” 

Pigwidgeon was so overexcited at the idea of a delivery 
he was flying around and around Harry’s head, 

Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 



hooting incessantly. Ron snatched Pigwidgeon out of 
the air and held him still while Harry attached the 
letter to his leg. 

“There’s no way any of the other tasks are going to be 
that dangerous, how could they be?” Ron went on as 
he carried Pigwidgeon to the window. “You know 
what? I reckon you could win this tournament, Harry, 
I’m serious.” 

Harry knew that Ron was only saying this to make up 
for his behavior of the last few weeks, but he 
appreciated it all the same. Hermione, however, 
leaned against the Owlery wall, folded her arms, and 
frowned at Ron. 

“Harry’s got a long way to go before he finishes this 
tournament,” she said seriously. “If that was the first 
task, I hate to think what’s coming next.” 

“Right little ray of sunshine, aren’t you?” said Ron. 
“You and Professor Trelawney should get together 
sometime.” 

He threw Pigwidgeon out of the window. Pigwidgeon 
plummeted twelve feet before managing to pull 
himself back up again; the letter attached to his leg 
was much longer and heavier than usual — Harry 
hadn’t been able to resist giving Sirius a blow-by-blow 
account of exactly how he had swerved, circled, and 
dodged the Horntail. They watched Pigwidgeon 
disappear into the darkness, and then Ron said, 

“Well, we’d better get downstairs for your surprise 
party, Harry — Fred and George should have nicked 
enough food from the kitchens by now.” 

Sure enough, when they entered the Gryffindor 
common room it exploded with cheers and yells again. 
There were mountains of cakes and flagons of 

Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




pumpkin juice and butterbeer on every surface; Lee 
Jordan had let off some Filibuster’s Fireworks, so that 
the air was thick with stars and sparks; and Dean 
Thomas, who was very good at drawing, had put up 
some impressive new banners, most of which depicted 
Harry zooming around the Horntail’s head on his 
Firebolt, though a couple showed Cedric with his 
head on fire. 

Harry helped himself to food; he had almost forgotten 
what it was like to feel properly hungry, and sat down 
with Ron and Hermione. He couldn’t believe how 
happy he felt; he had Ron back on his side, he’d 
gotten through the first task, and he wouldn’t have to 
face the second one for three months. 

“Blimey, this is heavy,” said Lee Jordan, picking up 
the golden egg, which Harry had left on a table, and 
weighing it in his hands. “Open it, Harry, go on! Let’s 
just see what’s inside it!” 

“He’s supposed to work out the clue on his own,” 
Hermione said swiftly. “It’s in the tournament rules. 



“I was supposed to work out how to get past the 
dragon on my own too,” Harry muttered, so only 
Hermione could hear him, and she grinned rather 
guiltily. 

“Yeah, go on, Harry, open it!” several people echoed. 

Lee passed Harry the egg, and Harry dug his 
fingernails into the groove that ran all the way around 
it and prised it open. 

It was hollow and completely empty — but the 
moment Harry opened it, the most horrible noise, a 
loud and screechy wailing, filled the room. The 

Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




nearest thing to it Harry had ever heard was the ghost 
orchestra at Nearly Headless Nick’s deathday party, 
who had all been playing the musical saw. 

“Shut it!” Fred bellowed, his hands over his ears. 

“What was that?” said Seamus Finnigan, staring at 
the egg as Harry slammed it shut again. “Sounded 
like a banshee. ... Maybe you’ve got to get past one of 
those next, Harry!” 

“It was someone being tortured!” said Neville, who 
had gone very white and spilled sausage rolls all over 
the floor. “You’re going to have to fight the Cruciatus 
Curse!” 

“Don’t be a prat, Neville, that’s illegal,” said George. 
“They wouldn’t use the Cruciatus Curse on the 
champions. I thought it sounded a bit like Percy 
singing ... maybe you’ve got to attack him while he’s 
in the shower, Harry.” 

“Want a jam tart, Hermione?” said Fred. 

Hermione looked doubtfully at the plate he was 
offering her. Fred grinned. 

“It’s all right,” he said. “I haven’t done anything to 
them. It’s the custard creams you’ve got to watch — ” 

Neville, who had just bitten into a custard cream, 
choked and spat it out. Fred laughed. 

“Just my little joke, Neville. ...” 

Hermione took a jam tart. Then she said, “Did you get 
all this from the kitchens, Fred?” 



Page | 404 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yep,” said Fred, grinning at her. He put on a high- 
pitched squeak and imitated a house-elf. “ ‘Anything 
we can get you, sir, anything at all!’ They’re dead 
helpful ... get me a roast ox if I said I was peckish.” 

“How do you get in there?” Hermione said in an 
innocently casual sort of voice. 

“Easy,” said Fred, “concealed door behind a painting 
of a bowl of fruit. Just tickle the pear, and it giggles 
and — ” He stopped and looked suspiciously at her. 
“Why?” 

“Nothing,” said Hermione quickly. 

“Going to try and lead the house-elves out on strike 
now, are you?” said George. “Going to give up all the 
leaflet stuff and try and stir them up into rebellion?” 

Several people chortled. Hermione didn’t answer. 

“Don’t you go upsetting them and telling them they’ve 
got to take clothes and salaries!” said Fred warningly. 
“You’ll put them off their cooking!” 

Just then, Neville caused a slight diversion by turning 
into a large canary. 

“Oh — sorry, Neville!” Fred shouted over all the 
laughter. “I forgot — it was the custard creams we 
hexed — ” 

Within a minute, however, Neville had molted, and 
once his feathers had fallen off, he reappeared looking 
entirely normal. He even joined in laughing. 

“Canary Creams!” Fred shouted to the excitable 
crowd. “George and I invented them — seven Sickles 
each, a bargain!” 

Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




It was nearly one in the morning when Harry finally 
went up to the dormitory with Ron, Neville, Seamus, 
and Dean. Before he pulled the curtains of his four- 
poster shut, Harry set his tiny model of the 
Hungarian Horntail on the table next to his bed, 
where it yawned, curled up, and closed its eyes. 

Really, Harry thought, as he pulled the hangings on 
his four-poster closed, Hagrid had a point . . . they 
were all right, really, dragons. ... 

The start of December brought wind and sleet to 
Hogwarts. Drafty though the castle always was in 
winter, Harry was glad of its fires and thick walls 
every time he passed the Durmstrang ship on the 
lake, which was pitching in the high winds, its black 
sails billowing against the dark skies. He thought the 
Beauxbatons caravan was likely to be pretty chilly 
too. Hagrid, he noticed, was keeping Madame 
Maxime’s horses well provided with their preferred 
drink of single-malt whiskey; the fumes wafting from 
the trough in the corner of their paddock was enough 
to make the entire Care of Magical Creatures class 
light-headed. This was unhelpful, as they were still 
tending the horrible skrewts and needed their wits 
about them. 

“I’m not sure whether they hibernate or not,” Hagrid 
told the shivering class in the windy pumpkin patch 
next lesson. “Thought we’d jus’ try an’ see if they 
fancied a kip ... we’ll jus’ settle ’em down in these 
boxes. ...” 

There were now only ten skrewts left; apparently their 
desire to kill one another had not been exercised out 
of them. Each of them was now approaching six feet 
in length. Their thick gray armor; their powerful, 
scuttling legs; their fire-blasting ends; their stings 
and their suckers, combined to make the skrewts the 
most repulsive things Harry had ever seen. The class 
Page | 406 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




looked dispiritedly at the enormous boxes Hagrid had 
brought out, all lined with pillows and fluffy blankets. 

“Well jus’ lead ’em in here,” Hagrid said, “an’ put the 
lids on, and we’ll see what happens.” 

But the skrewts, it transpired, did not hibernate, and 
did not appreciate being forced into pillow-lined boxes 
and nailed in. Hagrid was soon yelling, “Don’ panic, 
now, don’ panic!” while the skrewts rampaged around 
the pumpkin patch, now strewn with the smoldering 
wreckage of the boxes. Most of the class — Malfoy, 
Crabbe, and Goyle in the lead — had fled into 
Hagrid ’s cabin through the back door and barricaded 
themselves in; Harry, Ron, and Hermione, however, 
were among those who remained outside trying to 
help Hagrid. Together they managed to restrain and 
tie up nine of the skrewts, though at the cost of 
numerous burns and cuts; finally, only one skrewt 
was left. 

“Don’ frighten him, now!” Hagrid shouted as Ron and 
Harry used their wands to shoot jets of fiery sparks at 
the skrewt, which was advancing menacingly on 
them, its sting arched, quivering, over its back. “Jus’ 
try an’ slip the rope ’round his sting, so he won’ hurt 
any o’ the others!” 

“Yeah, we wouldn’t want that!” Ron shouted angrily 
as he and Harry backed into the wall of Hagrid ’s 
cabin, still holding the skrewt off with their sparks. 

“Well, well, well ... this does look like fun.” 

Rita Skeeter was leaning on Hagrid ’s garden fence, 
looking in at the mayhem. She was wearing a thick 
magenta cloak with a furry purple collar today, and 
her crocodile-skin handbag was over her arm. 



Page | 407 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid launched himself forward on top of the skrewt 
that was cornering Harry and Ron and flattened it; a 
blast of fire shot out of its end, withering the 
pumpkin plants nearby. 

“Who ’re you?” Hagrid asked Rita Skeeter as he 
slipped a loop of rope around the skrewt’s sting and 
tightened it. 

“Rita Skeeter, Daily Prophet reporter,” Rita replied, 
beaming at him. Her gold teeth glinted. 

“Thought Dumbledore said you weren’ allowed inside 
the school anymore,” said Hagrid, frowning slightly as 
he got off the slightly squashed skrewt and started 
tugging it over to its fellows. 

Rita acted as though she hadn’t heard what Hagrid 
had said. 

“What are these fascinating creatures called?” she 
asked, beaming still more widely. 

“Blast-Ended Skrewts,” grunted Hagrid. 

“Really?” said Rita, apparently full of lively interest. 
“I’ve never heard of them before ... where do they 
come from?” 

Harry noticed a dull red flush rising up out of 
Hagrid’s wild black beard, and his heart sank. Where 
had Hagrid got the skrewts from? Hermione, who 
seemed to be thinking along these lines, said quickly, 
“They’re very interesting, aren’t they? Aren’t they, 
Harry?” 

“What? Oh yeah ... ouch ... interesting,” said Harry as 
she stepped on his foot. 



Page | 408 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah, you’re here, Harry!” said Rita Skeeter as she 
looked around. “So you like Care of Magical 
Creatures, do you? One of your favorite lessons?” 

“Yes,” said Harry stoutly. Hagrid beamed at him. 

“Lovely,” said Rita. “Really lovely. Been teaching 
long?” she added to Hagrid. 

Harry noticed her eyes travel over Dean (who had a 
nasty cut across one cheek), Lavender (whose robes 
were badly singed), Seamus (who was nursing several 
burnt fingers), and then to the cabin windows, where 
most of the class stood, their noses pressed against 
the glass waiting to see if the coast was clear. 

“This is o’ny me second year,” said Hagrid. 

“Lovely... I don’t suppose you’d like to give an 
interview, would you? Share some of your experience 
of magical creatures? The Prophet does a zoological 
column every Wednesday, as I’m sure you know. We 
could feature these — er — Bang-Ended Scoots.” 

“Blast-Ended Skrewts,” Hagrid said eagerly. “Er — 
yeah, why not?” 

Harry had a very bad feeling about this, but there was 
no way of communicating it to Hagrid without Rita 
Skeeter seeing, so he had to stand and watch in 
silence as Hagrid and Rita Skeeter made 
arrangements to meet in the Three Broomsticks for a 
good long interview later that week. Then the bell 
rang up at the castle, signaling the end of the lesson. 

“Well, good-bye, Harry!” Rita Skeeter called merrily to 
him as he set off with Ron and Hermione. “Until 
Friday night, then, Hagrid!” 



Page | 409 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Shell twist everything he says,” Harry said under his 
breath. 

“Just as long as he didn’t import those skrewts 
illegally or anything,” said Hermione desperately. 

They looked at one another — it was exactly the sort 
of thing Hagrid might do. 

“Hagrid’s been in loads of trouble before, and 
Dumbledore’s never sacked him,” said Ron 
consolingly. “Worst that can happen is Hagrid’ll have 
to get rid of the skrewts. Sorry ... did I say worst? I 
meant best.” 

Harry and Hermione laughed, and, feeling slightly 
more cheerful, went off to lunch. 

Harry thoroughly enjoyed double Divination that 
afternoon; they were still doing star charts and 
predictions, but now that he and Ron were friends 
once more, the whole thing seemed very funny again. 
Professor Trelawney, who had been so pleased with 
the pair of them when they had been predicting their 
own horrific deaths, quickly became irritated as they 
sniggered through her explanation of the various 
ways in which Pluto could disrupt everyday life. 

“I would think,” she said, in a mystical whisper that 
did not conceal her obvious annoyance, “that some of 
us” — she stared very meaningfully at Harry — 

“might be a little less frivolous had they seen what I 
have seen during my crystal gazing last night. As I sat 
here, absorbed in my needlework, the urge to consult 
the orb overpowered me. I arose, I settled myself 
before it, and I gazed into its crystalline depths . . . and 
what do you think I saw gazing back at me?” 

“An ugly old bat in outsize specs?” Ron muttered 
under his breath. 

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




Harry fought hard to keep his face straight. 

“Death, my dears.” 

Parvati and Lavender both put their hands over their 
mouths, looking horrified. 

“Yes,” said Professor Trelawney, nodding impressively, 
“it comes, ever closer, it circles overhead like a 
vulture, ever lower ... ever lower over the castle. ...” 

She stared pointedly at Harry, who yawned very 
widely and obviously. 

“It’d be a bit more impressive if she hadn’t done it 
about eighty times before,” Harry said as they finally 
regained the fresh air of the staircase beneath 
Professor Trelawney’s room. “But if I’d dropped dead 
every time she’s told me I’m going to, I’d be a medical 
miracle.” 

“You’d be a sort of extra-concentrated ghost,” said 
Ron, chortling, as they passed the Bloody Baron going 
in the opposite direction, his wide eyes staring 
sinisterly. “At least we didn’t get homework. I hope 
Hermione got loads off Professor Vector, I love not 
working when she is. ...” 

But Hermione wasn’t at dinner, nor was she in the 
library when they went to look for her afterward. The 
only person in there was Viktor Krum. Ron hovered 
behind the bookshelves for a while, watching Krum, 
debating in whispers with Harry whether he should 
ask for an autograph — but then Ron realized that six 
or seven girls were lurking in the next row of books, 
debating exactly the same thing, and he lost his 
enthusiasm for the idea. 



Page | 411 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Wonder where she’s got to?” Ron said as he and 
Harry went back to Gryffindor Tower. 



“Dunno ... balderdash.” 

But the Fat Lady had barely begun to swing forward 
when the sound of racing feet behind them 
announced Hermione’s arrival. 

“Harry!” she panted, skidding to a halt beside him 
(the Fat Lady stared down at her, eyebrows raised). 
“Harry, you’ve got to come — you’ve got to come, the 
most amazing thing’s happened — please — ” 

She seized Harry’s arm and started to try to drag him 
back along the corridor. 

“What’s the matter?” Harry said. 

“I’ll show you when we get there — oh come on, quick 



Harry looked around at Ron; he looked back at Harry, 
intrigued. 

“Okay,” Harry said, starting off back down the 
corridor with Hermione, Ron hurrying to keep up. 

“Oh don’t mind me!” the Fat Lady called irritably after 
them. “Don’t apologize for bothering me! I’ll just hang 
here, wide open, until you get back, shall I?” 

“Yeah, thanks!” Ron shouted over his shoulder. 

“Hermione, where are we going?” Harry asked, after 
she had led them down through six floors, and 
started down the marble staircase into the entrance 
hall. 



Page | 412 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You’ll see, you’ll see in a minute!” said Hermione 
excitedly. 

She turned left at the bottom of the staircase and 
hurried toward the door through which Cedric 
Diggory had gone the night after the Goblet of Fire 
had regurgitated his and Harry’s names. Harry had 
never been through here before. He and Ron followed 
Hermione down a flight of stone steps, but instead of 
ending up in a gloomy underground passage like the 
one that led to Snape’s dungeon, they found 
themselves in a broad stone corridor, brightly lit with 
torches, and decorated with cheerful paintings that 
were mainly of food. 

“Oh hang on ...” said Harry slowly, halfway down the 
corridor. “Wait a minute, Hermione. ...” 

“What?” She turned around to look at him, 
anticipation all over her face. 

“I know what this is about,” said Harry. 

He nudged Ron and pointed to the painting just 
behind Hermione. It showed a gigantic silver fruit 
bowl. 

“Hermione!” said Ron, cottoning on. “You’re trying to 
rope us into that spew stuff again!” 

“No, no, I’m not!” she said hastily. “And it’s not spew, 
Ron — ” 

“Changed the name, have you?” said Ron, frowning at 
her. “What are we now, then, the House-Elf Liberation 
Front? I’m not barging into that kitchen and trying to 
make them stop work, I’m not doing it — ” 



Page | 413 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm not asking you to!” Hermione said impatiently. “I 
came down here just now, to talk to them all, and I 
found — oh come on, Harry, I want to show you!” 

She seized his arm again, pulled him in front of the 
picture of the giant fruit bowl, stretched out her 
forefinger, and tickled the huge green pear. It began 
to squirm, chuckling, and suddenly turned into a 
large green door handle. Hermione seized it, pulled 
the door open, and pushed Harry hard in the back, 
forcing him inside. 

He had one brief glimpse of an enormous, high- 
ceilinged room, large as the Great Hall above it, with 
mounds of glittering brass pots and pans heaped 
around the stone walls, and a great brick fireplace at 
the other end, when something small hurtled toward 
him from the middle of the room, squealing, “Harry 
Potter, sir! Harry Potteri” 

Next second all the wind had been knocked out of 
him as the squealing elf hit him hard in the midriff, 
hugging him so tightly he thought his ribs would 
break. 

“D-Dobby?” Harry gasped. 

“It is Dobby, sir, it is!” squealed the voice from 
somewhere around his navel. “Dobby has been 
hoping and hoping to see Harry Potter, sir, and Harry 
Potter has come to see him, sir!” 

Dobby let go and stepped back a few paces, beaming 
up at Harry, his enormous, green, tennis-ball-shaped 
eyes brimming with tears of happiness. He looked 
almost exactly as Harry remembered him; the pencil- 
shaped nose, the batlike ears, the long fingers and 
feet — all except the clothes, which were very 
different. 

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




When Dobby had worked for the Malfoys, he had 
always worn the same filthy old pillowcase. Now, 
however, he was wearing the strangest assortment of 
garments Harry had ever seen; he had done an even 
worse job of dressing himself than the wizards at the 
World Cup. He was wearing a tea cozy for a hat, on 
which he had pinned a number of bright badges; a tie 
patterned with horseshoes over a bare chest, a pair of 
what looked like children’s soccer shorts, and odd 
socks. One of these, Harry saw, was the black one 
Harry had removed from his own foot and tricked Mr. 
Malfoy into giving Dobby, thereby setting Dobby free. 
The other was covered in pink and orange stripes. 

“Dobby, what’re you doing here?” Harry said in 
amazement. 

“Dobby has come to work at Hogwarts, sir!” Dobby 
squealed excitedly. “Professor Dumbledore gave 
Dobby and Winky jobs, sir!” 

“Winky?” said Harry. “She’s here too?” 

“Yes, sir, yes!” said Dobby, and he seized Harry’s 
hand and pulled him off into the kitchen between the 
four long wooden tables that stood there. Each of 
these tables, Harry noticed as he passed them, was 
positioned exactly beneath the four House tables 
above, in the Great Hall. At the moment, they were 
clear of food, dinner having finished, but he supposed 
that an hour ago they had been laden with dishes 
that were then sent up through the ceiling to their 
counterparts above. 

At least a hundred little elves were standing around 
the kitchen, beaming, bowing, and curtsying as 
Dobby led Harry past them. They were all wearing the 
same uniform: a tea towel stamped with the Hogwarts 
crest, and tied, as Winky’s had been, like a toga. 

Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dobby stopped in front of the brick fireplace and 
pointed. 

“Winky, sir!” he said. 

Winky was sitting on a stool by the fire. Unlike 
Dobby, she had obviously not foraged for clothes. She 
was wearing a neat little skirt and blouse with a 
matching blue hat, which had holes in it for her large 
ears. However, while every one of Dobby ’s strange 
collection of garments was so clean and well cared for 
that it looked brand-new, Winky was plainly not 
taking care of her clothes at all. There were soup 
stains all down her blouse and a burn in her skirt. 

“Hello, Winky,” said Harry. 

Winky’s lip quivered. Then she burst into tears, which 
spilled out of her great brown eyes and splashed 
down her front, just as they had done at the 
Quidditch World Cup. 

“Oh dear,” said Hermione. She and Ron had followed 
Harry and Dobby to the end of the kitchen. “Winky, 
don’t cry, please don’t ...” 

But Winky cried harder than ever. Dobby, on the 
other hand, beamed up at Harry. 

“Would Harry Potter like a cup of tea?” he squeaked 
loudly, over Winky’s sobs. 

“Er — yeah, okay,” said Harry. 

Instantly, about six house-elves came trotting up 
behind him, bearing a large silver tray laden with a 
teapot, cups for Harry, Ron, and Hermione, a milk 
jug, and a large plate of biscuits. 



Page | 416 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Good service!” Ron said, in an impressed voice. 
Hermione frowned at him, but the elves all looked 
delighted; they bowed very low and retreated. 

“How long have you been here, Dobby?” Harry asked 
as Dobby handed around the tea. 

“Only a week, Harry Potter, sir!” said Dobby happily. 
“Dobby came to see Professor Dumbledore, sir. You 
see, sir, it is very difficult for a house-elf who has 
been dismissed to get a new position, sir, very difficult 
indeed — ” 

At this, Winky howled even harder, her squashed- 
tomato of a nose dribbling all down her front, though 
she made no effort to stem the flow. 

“Dobby has traveled the country for two whole years, 
sir, trying to find work!” Dobby squeaked. “But Dobby 
hasn’t found work, sir, because Dobby wants paying 
now!” 

The house-elves all around the kitchen, who had been 
listening and watching with interest, all looked away 
at these words, as though Dobby had said something 
rude and embarrassing. Hermione, however, said, 
“Good for you, Dobby!” 

“Thank you, miss!” said Dobby, grinning toothily at 
her. “But most wizards doesn’t want a house-elf who 
wants paying, miss. That’s not the point of a house- 
elf,’ they says, and they slammed the door in Dobby ’s 
face! Dobby likes work, but he wants to wear clothes 
and he wants to be paid, Harry Potter. . . . Dobby likes 
being free!” 

The Hogwarts house-elves had now started edging 
away from Dobby, as though he were carrying 
something contagious. Winky, however, remained 

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




where she was, though there was a definite increase 
in the volume of her crying. 

“And then, Harry Potter, Dobby goes to visit Winky, 
and finds out Winky has been freed too, sir!” said 
Dobby delightedly. 

At this, Winky flung herself forward off her stool and 
lay facedown on the flagged stone floor, beating her 
tiny fists upon it and positively screaming with 
misery. Hermione hastily dropped down to her knees 
beside her and tried to comfort her, but nothing she 
said made the slightest difference. Dobby continued 
with his story, shouting shrilly over Winky’s 
screeches. 

“And then Dobby had the idea, Harry Potter, sir! Why 
doesn’t Dobby and Winky find work together?’ Dobby 
says. Where is there enough work for two house- 
elves?’ says Winky. And Dobby thinks, and it comes 
to him, sir! Hogwarts\ So Dobby and Winky came to 
see Professor Dumbledore, sir, and Professor 
Dumbledore took us on!” 

Dobby beamed very brightly, and happy tears welled 
in his eyes again. 

“And Professor Dumbledore says he will pay Dobby, 
sir, if Dobby wants paying! And so Dobby is a free elf, 
sir, and Dobby gets a Galleon a week and one day off 
a month!” 

“That’s not very much!” Hermione shouted 
indignantly from the floor, over Winky’s continued 
screaming and fist-beating. 

“Professor Dumbledore offered Dobby ten Galleons a 
week, and weekends off,” said Dobby, suddenly giving 
a little shiver, as though the prospect of so much 

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




leisure and riches were frightening, “but Dobby beat 
him down, miss. ... Dobby likes freedom, miss, but he 
isn’t wanting too much, miss, he likes work better.” 

“And how much is Professor Dumbledore paying you, 
Winky?” Hermione asked kindly. 

If she had thought this would cheer up Winky, she 
was wildly mistaken. Winky did stop crying, but when 
she sat up she was glaring at Hermione through her 
massive brown eyes, her whole face sopping wet and 
suddenly furious. 

“Winky is a disgraced elf, but Winky is not yet getting 
paid!” she squeaked. “Winky is not sunk so low as 
that! Winky is properly ashamed of being freed!” 

“Ashamed?” said Hermione blankly. “But — Winky, 
come on! It’s Mr. Crouch who should be ashamed, not 
you! You didn’t do anything wrong, he was really 
horrible to you — ” 

But at these words, Winky clapped her hands over 
the holes in her hat, flattening her ears so that she 
couldn’t hear a word, and screeched, “You is not 
insulting my master, miss! You is not insulting Mr. 
Crouch! Mr. Crouch is a good wizard, miss! Mr. 
Crouch is right to sack bad Winky!” 

“Winky is having trouble adjusting, Harry Potter,” 
squeaked Dobby confidentially. “Winky forgets she is 
not bound to Mr. Crouch anymore; she is allowed to 
speak her mind now, but she won’t do it.” 

“Can’t house-elves speak their minds about their 
masters, then?” Harry asked. 

“Oh no, sir, no,” said Dobby, looking suddenly 
serious. “ Tis part of the house-elf’s enslavement, sir. 

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




We keeps their secrets and our silence, sir. We 
upholds the family’s honor, and we never speaks ill of 
them — though Professor Dumbledore told Dobby he 
does not insist upon this. Professor Dumbledore said 
we is free to — to — ” 

Dobby looked suddenly nervous and beckoned Harry 
closer. Harry bent forward. Dobby whispered, “He 
said we is free to call him a — a barmy old codger if 
we likes, sir!” 

Dobby gave a frightened sort of giggle. 

“But Dobby is not wanting to, Harry Potter,” he said, 
talking normally again, and shaking his head so that 
his ears flapped. “Dobby likes Professor Dumbledore 
very much, sir, and is proud to keep his secrets and 
our silence for him.” 

“But you can say what you like about the Malfoys 
now?” Harry asked him, grinning. 

A slightly fearful look came into Dobby’s immense 
eyes. 

“Dobby — Dobby could,” he said doubtfully. He 
squared his small shoulders. “Dobby could tell Harry 
Potter that his old masters were — were — bad Dark 
wizards'.” 

Dobby stood for a moment, quivering all over, horror- 
struck by his own daring — then he rushed over to 
the nearest table and began banging his head on it 
very hard, squealing, “ Bad Dobby ! Bad Dobby\” 

Harry seized Dobby by the back of his tie and pulled 
him away from the table. 



Page | 420 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“Thank you, Harry Potter, thank you,” said Dobby 
breathlessly, rubbing his head. 

“You just need a bit of practice,” Harry said. 