"Why callest thou me murderer, and not rather the wrath of God burning
after the steps of the oppressor, and cleansing the earth when it is wet
with blood?"
That series of terrific events by which our quiet city and university in the
northeastern quarter of Germany were convulsed during the year 1816,
has in itself, and considered merely as a blind movement of human tigerpassion ranging unchained among men, something too memorable to be
forgotten or left without its own separate record; but the moral lesson
impressed by these events is yet more memorable, and deserves the
deep attention of coming generations in their struggle after human
improvement, not merely in its own limited field of interest directly
awakened, but in all analogous fields of interest; as in fact already, and
more than once, in connection with these very events, this lesson has
obtained the effectual attention of Christian kings and princes assembled
in congress. No tragedy, indeed, among all the sad ones by which the
charities of the human heart or of the fireside have ever been outraged,
can better merit a separate chapter in the private history of German
manners or social life than this unparalleled case. And, on the other hand,
no one can put in a better claim to be the historian than myself.
I was at the time, and still am, a professor in that city and university
which had the melancholy distinction of being its theater. I knew
familiarly all the parties who were concerned in it, either as sufferers or
as agents. I was present from first to last, and watched the whole course
of the mysterious storm which fell upon our devoted city in a strength like
that of a West Indian hurricane, and which did seriously threaten at one
time to depopulate our university, through the dark suspicions which
settled upon its members, and the natural reaction of generous
indignation in repelling them; while the city in its more stationary and
native classes would very soon have manifested THEIR awful sense of
things, of the hideous insecurity for life, and of the unfathomable dangers
which had undermined their hearths below their very feet, by sacrificing,
whenever circumstances allowed them, their houses and beautiful
gardens in exchange for days uncursed by panic, and nights unpolluted by
blood. Nothing, I can take upon myself to assert, was left undone of all
that human foresight could suggest, or human ingenuity could
accomplish. But observe the melancholy result: the more certain did
these arrangements strike people as remedies for the evil, so much the
more effectually did they aid the terror, but, above all, the awe, the sense
of mystery, when ten cases of total extermination, applied to separate
households, had occurred, in every one of which these precautionary aids
had failed to yield the slightest assistance. The horror, the perfect frenzy
of fear, which seized upon the town after that experience, baffles all
attempt at description. Had these various contrivances failed merely in
some human and intelligible way, as by bringing the aid too tardily-- still,
in such cases, though the danger would no less have been evidently
deepened, nobody would have felt any further mystery than what, from
the very first, rested upon the persons and the motives of the murderers.
But, as it was, when, in ten separate cases of exterminating carnage, the
astounded police, after an examination the most searching, pursued from
day to day, and almost exhausting the patience by the minuteness of the
investigation, had finally pronounced that no attempt apparently had been
made to benefit by any of the signals preconcerted, that no footstep
apparently had moved in that direction--then, and after that result, a
blind misery of fear fell upon the population, so much the worse than any
anguish of a beleaguered city that is awaiting the storming fury of a
victorious enemy, by how much the shadowy, the uncertain, the infinite,
is at all times more potent in mastering the mind than a danger that is
known, measurable, palpable, and human. The very police, instead of
offering protection or encouragement, were seized with terror for
themselves. And the general feeling, as it was described to me by a grave
citizen whom I met in a morning walk (for the overmastering sense of a
public calamity broke down every barrier of reserve, and all men talked
freely to all men in the streets, as they would have done during the
rockings of an earthquake), was, even among the boldest, like that which
sometimes takes possession of the mind in dreams--when one feels
oneself sleeping alone, utterly divided from all call or hearing of friends,
doors open that should be shut, or unlocked that should be triply secured,
the very walls gone, barriers swallowed up by unknown abysses, nothing
around one but frail curtains, and a world of illimitable night, whisperings
at a distance, correspondence going on between darkness and darkness,
like one deep calling to another, and the dreamer's own heart the center
from which the whole network of this unimaginable chaos radiates, by
means of which the blank PRIVATIONS of silence and darkness become
powers the most POSITIVE and awful.
Agencies of fear, as of any other passion, and, above all, of passion felt in
communion with thousands, and in which the heart beats in conscious
sympathy with an entire city, through all its regions of high and low,
young and old, strong and weak; such agencies avail to raise and
transfigure the natures of men; mean minds become elevated; dull men
become eloquent; and when matters came to this crisis, the public
feeling, as made known by voice, gesture, manner, or words, was such
that no stranger could represent it to his fancy. In that respect, therefore,
I had an advantage, being upon the spot through the whole course of the
affair, for giving a faithful narrative; as I had still more eminently, from
the sort of central station which I occupied, with respect to all the
movements of the case. I may add that I had another advantage, not
possessed, or not in the same degree, by any other inhabitant of the
town. I was personally acquainted with every family of the slightest
account belonging to the resident population; whether among the old
local gentry, or the new settlers whom the late wars had driven to take
refuge within our walls.
It was in September, 1815, that I received a letter from the chief
secretary to the Prince of M----, a nobleman connected with the
diplomacy of Russia, from which I quote an extract: "I wish, in short, to
recommend to your attentions, and in terms stronger than I know how to
devise, a young man on whose behalf the czar himself is privately known
to have expressed the very strongest interest. He was at the battle of
Waterloo as an aide-de-camp to a Dutch general officer, and is decorated
with distinctions won upon that awful day. However, though serving in
that instance under English orders, and although an Englishman of rank,
he does not belong to the English military service. He has served, young
as he is, under VARIOUS banners, and under ours, in particular, in the
cavalry of our imperial guard. He is English by birth, nephew to the Earl of
E., and heir presumptive to his immense estates. There is a wild story
current, that his mother was a gypsy of transcendent beauty, which may
account for his somewhat Moorish complexion, though, after all, THAT is
not of a deeper tinge than I have seen among many an Englishman. He is
himself one of the noblest looking of God's creatures. Both father and
mother, however, are now dead. Since then he has become the favorite
of his uncle, who detained him in England after the emperor had
departed--and, as this uncle is now in the last stage of infirmity, Mr.
Wyndham's succession to the vast family estates is inevitable, and
probably near at hand. Meantime, he is anxious for some assistance in his
studies. Intellectually he stands in the very first rank of men, as I am
sure you will not be slow to discover; but his long military service, and
the unparalleled tumult of our European history since 1805, have
interfered (as you may suppose) with the cultivation of his mind; for he
entered the cavalry service of a German power when a mere boy, and
shifted about from service to service as the hurricane of war blew from
this point or from that. During the French anabasis to Moscow he entered
our service, made himself a prodigious favorite with the whole imperial
family, and even now is only in his twenty-second year. As to his
accomplishments, they will speak for themselves; they are infinite, and
applicable to every situation of life. Greek is what he wants from you;--
never ask about terms. He will acknowledge any trouble he may give you,
as he acknowledges all trouble, en prince. And ten years hence you will
look back with pride upon having contributed your part to the formation
of one whom all here at St. Petersburg, not soldiers only, but we
diplomates, look upon as certain to prove a great man, and a leader
among the intellects of Christendom."
Two or three other letters followed; and at length it was arranged that Mr.
Maximilian Wyndham should take up his residence at my monastic abode
for one year. He was to keep a table, and an establishment of servants, at
his own cost; was to have an apartment of some dozen or so of rooms;
the unrestricted use of the library; with some other public privileges
willingly conceded by the magistracy of the town; in return for all which
he was to pay me a thousand guineas; and already beforehand, by way of
acknowledgment for the public civilities of the town, he sent, through my
hands, a contribution of three hundred guineas to the various local
institutions for education of the poor, or for charity.
The Russian secretary had latterly corresponded with me from a little
German town, not more than ninety miles distant; and, as he had special
couriers at his service, the negotiations advanced so rapidly that all was
closed before the end of September. And, when once that consummation
was attained, I, that previously had breathed no syllable of what was
stirring, now gave loose to the interesting tidings, and suffered them to
spread through the whole compass of the town. It will be easily imagined
that such a story, already romantic enough in its first outline, would lose
nothing in the telling. An Englishman to begin with, which name of itself,
and at all times, is a passport into German favor, but much more since
the late memorable wars that but for Englishmen would have drooped
into disconnected efforts--next, an Englishman of rank and of the haute
noblesse--then a soldier covered with brilliant distinctions, and in the
most brilliant arm of the service; young, moreover, and yet a veteran by
his experience--fresh from the most awful battle of this planet since the
day of Pharsalia,--radiant with the favor of courts and of imperial ladies;
finally (which alone would have given him an interest in all female
hearts), an Antinous of faultless beauty, a Grecian statue, as it were, into
which the breath of life had been breathed by some modern Pygmalion;--
such a pomp of gifts and endowments settling upon one man's head,
should not have required for its effect the vulgar consummation (and yet
to many it WAS the consummation and crest of the whole) that he was
reputed to be rich beyond the dreams of romance or the necessities of a
fairy tale. Unparalleled was the impression made upon our stagnant
society; every tongue was busy in discussing the marvelous young
Englishman from morning to night; every female fancy was busy in
depicting the personal appearance of this gay apparition.
On his arrival at my house, I became sensible of a truth which I had
observed some years before. The commonplace maxim is, that it is
dangerous to raise expectations too high. This, which is thus generally
expressed, and without limitation, is true only conditionally; it is true then
and there only where there is but little merit to sustain and justify the
expectation. But in any case where the merit is transcendent of its kind, it
is always useful to rack the expectation up to the highest point. In
anything which partakes of the infinite, the most unlimited expectations
will find ample room for gratification; while it is certain that ordinary
observers, possessing little sensibility, unless where they have been
warned to expect, will often fail to see what exists in the most
conspicuous splendor. In this instance it certainly did no harm to the
subject of expectation that I had been warned to look for so much. The
warning, at any rate, put me on the lookout for whatever eminence there
might be of grandeur in his personal appearance; while, on the other
hand, this existed in such excess, so far transcending anything I had ever
met with in my experience, that no expectation which it is in words to
raise could have been disappointed.
These thoughts traveled with the rapidity of light through my brain, as at
one glance my eye took in the supremacy of beauty and power which
seemed to have alighted from the clouds before me. Power, and the
contemplation of power, in any absolute incarnation of grandeur or
excess, necessarily have the instantaneous effect of quelling all
perturbation. My composure was restored in a moment. I looked steadily
at him. We both bowed. And, at the moment when he raised his head
from that inclination, I caught the glance of his eye; an eye such as might
have been looked for in a face of such noble lineaments--
"Blending the nature of the star
With that of summer skies;"
and, therefore, meant by nature for the residence and organ of serene
and gentle emotions; but it surprised, and at the same time filled me
more almost with consternation than with pity, to observe that in those
eyes a light of sadness had settled more profound than seemed possible
for youth, or almost commensurate to a human sorrow; a sadness that
might have become a Jewish prophet, when laden with inspirations of
woe.
Two months had now passed away since the arrival of Mr. Wyndham. He
had been universally introduced to the superior society of the place; and,
as I need hardly say, universally received with favor and distinction. In
reality, his wealth and importance, his military honors, and the dignity of
his character, as expressed in his manners and deportment, were too
eminent to allow of his being treated with less than the highest attention
in any society whatever. But the effect of these various advantages,
enforced and recommended as they were by a personal beauty so rare,
was somewhat too potent for the comfort and self-possession of ordinary
people; and really exceeded in a painful degree the standard of
pretensions under which such people could feel themselves at their ease.
He was not naturally of a reserved turn; far from it. His disposition had
been open, frank, and confiding, originally; and his roving, adventurous
life, of which considerably more than one half had been passed in camps,
had communicated to his manners a more than military frankness. But
the profound melancholy which possessed him, from whatever cause it
arose, necessarily chilled the native freedom of his demeanor, unless
when it was revived by strength of friendship or of love. The effect was
awkward and embarrassing to all parties. Every voice paused or faltered
when he entered a room--dead silence ensued--not an eye but was
directed upon him, or else, sunk in timidity, settled upon the floor; and
young ladies seriously lost the power, for a time, of doing more than
murmuring a few confused, half-inarticulate syllables, or half-inarticulate
sounds. The solemnity, in fact, of a first presentation, and the utter
impossibility of soon recovering a free, unembarrassed movement of
conversation, made such scenes really distressing to all who participated
in them, either as actors or spectators. Certainly this result was not a
pure effect of manly beauty, however heroic, and in whatever excess; it
arose in part from the many and extraordinary endowments which had
centered in his person, not less from fortune than from nature; in part
also, as I have said, from the profound sadness and freezing gravity of
Mr. Wyndham's manner; but still more from the perplexing mystery which
surrounded that sadness.
Were there, then, no exceptions to this condition of awestruck
admiration? Yes; one at least there was in whose bosom the spell of allconquering passion soon thawed every trace of icy reserve. While the rest
of the world retained a dim sentiment of awe toward Mr. Wyndham,
Margaret Liebenheim only heard of such a feeling to wonder that it could
exist toward HIM. Never was there so victorious a conquest interchanged
between two youthful hearts-- never before such a rapture of
instantaneous sympathy. I did not witness the first meeting of this
mysterious Maximilian and this magnificent Margaret, and do not know
whether Margaret manifested that trepidation and embarrassment which
distressed so many of her youthful co-rivals; but, if she did, it must have
fled before the first glance of the young man's eye, which would interpret,
past all misunderstanding, the homage of his soul and the surrender of
his heart. Their third meeting I DID see; and there all shadow of
embarrassment had vanished, except, indeed, of that delicate
embarrassment which clings to impassioned admiration. On the part of
Margaret, it seemed as if a new world had dawned upon her that she had
not so much as suspected among the capacities of human experience.
Like some bird she seemed, with powers unexercised for soaring and
flying, not understood even as yet, and that never until now had found an
element of air capable of sustaining her wings, or tempting her to put
forth her buoyant instincts. He, on the other hand, now first found the
realization of his dreams, and for a mere possibility which he had long too
deeply contemplated, fearing, however, that in his own case it might
prove a chimera, or that he might never meet a woman answering the
demands of his heart, he now found a corresponding reality that left
nothing to seek.
Here, then, and thus far, nothing but happiness had resulted from the
new arrangement. But, if this had been little anticipated by many, far less
had I, for my part, anticipated the unhappy revolution which was wrought
in the whole nature of Ferdinand von Harrelstein. He was the son of a
German baron; a man of good family, but of small estate who had been
pretty nearly a soldier of fortune in the Prussian service, and had, late in
life, won sufficient favor with the king and other military superiors, to
have an early prospect of obtaining a commission, under flattering
auspices, for this only son--a son endeared to him as the companion of
unprosperous years, and as a dutifully affectionate child. Ferdinand had
yet another hold upon his father's affections: his features preserved to
the baron's unclouded remembrance a most faithful and living memorial
of that angelic wife who had died in giving birth to this third child--the
only one who had long survived her. Anxious that his son should go
through a regular course of mathematical instruction, now becoming
annually more important in all the artillery services throughout Europe,
and that he should receive a tincture of other liberal studies which he had
painfully missed in his own military career, the baron chose to keep his
son for the last seven years at our college, until he was now entering
upon his twenty-third year. For the four last he had lived with me as the
sole pupil whom I had, or meant to have, had not the brilliant proposals
of the young Russian guardsman persuaded me to break my resolution.
Ferdinand von Harrelstein had good talents, not dazzling but respectable;
and so amiable were his temper and manners that I had introduced him
everywhere, and everywhere he was a favorite; and everywhere, indeed,
except exactly there where only in this world he cared for favor. Margaret
Liebenheim, she it was whom he loved, and had loved for years, with the
whole ardor of his ardent soul; she it was for whom, or at whose
command, he would willingly have died. Early he had felt that in her
hands lay his destiny; that she it was who must be his good or his evil
genius.
At first, and perhaps to the last, I pitied him exceedingly. But my pity
soon ceased to be mingled with respect. Before the arrival of Mr.
Wyndham he had shown himself generous, indeed magnanimous. But
never was there so painful an overthrow of a noble nature as manifested
itself in him. I believe that he had not himself suspected the strength of
his passion; and the sole resource for him, as I said often, was to quit the
city--to engage in active pursuits of enterprise, of ambition, or of science.
But he heard me as a somnambulist might have heard me--dreaming with
his eyes open. Sometimes he had fits of reverie, starting, fearful,
agitated; sometimes he broke out into maniacal movements of wrath,
invoking some absent person, praying, beseeching, menacing some airwove phantom; sometimes he slunk into solitary corners, muttering to
himself, and with gestures sorrowfully significant, or with tones and
fragments of expostulation that moved the most callous to compassion.
Still he turned a deaf ear to the only practical counsel that had a chance
for reaching his ears. Like a bird under the fascination of a rattlesnake, he
would not summon up the energies of his nature to make an effort at
flying away. "Begone, while it is time!" said others, as well as myself; for
more than I saw enough to fear some fearful catastrophe. "Lead us not
into temptation!" said his confessor to him in my hearing (for, though
Prussians, the Von Harrelsteins were Roman Catholics), "lead us not into
temptation!--that is our daily prayer to God. Then, my son, being led into
temptation, do not you persist in courting, nay, almost tempting
temptation. Try the effects of absence, though but for a month." The good
father even made an overture toward imposing a penance upon him, that
would have involved an absence of some duration. But he was obliged to
desist; for he saw that, without effecting any good, he would merely add
spiritual disobedience to the other offenses of the young man. Ferdinand
himself drew his attention to THIS; for he said: "Reverend father! do not
you, with the purpose of removing me from temptation, be yourself the
instrument for tempting me into a rebellion against the church. Do not
you weave snares about my steps; snares there are already, and but too
many." The old man sighed, and desisted.
Then came--But enough! From pity, from sympathy, from counsel, and
from consolation, and from scorn--from each of these alike the poor
stricken deer "recoiled into the wilderness;" he fled for days together into
solitary parts of the forest; fled, as I still hoped and prayed, in good
earnest and for a long farewell; but, alas! no: still he returned to the
haunts of his ruined happiness and his buried hopes, at each return
looking more like the wreck of his former self; and once I heard a
penetrating monk observe, whose convent stood near the city gates:
"There goes one ready equally for doing or suffering, and of whom we
shall soon hear that he is involved in some great catastrophe--it may be
of deep calamity--it may be of memorable guilt."
So stood matters among us. January was drawing to its close; the
weather was growing more and more winterly; high winds, piercingly
cold, were raving through our narrow streets; and still the spirit of social
festivity bade defiance to the storms which sang through our ancient
forests. From the accident of our magistracy being selected from the
tradesmen of the city, the hospitalities of the place were far more
extensive than would otherwise have happened; for every member of the
corporation gave two annual entertainments in his official character. And
such was the rivalship which prevailed, that often one quarter of the
year's income was spent upon these galas. Nor was any ridicule thus
incurred; for the costliness of the entertainment was understood to be an
expression of OFFICIAL pride, done in honor of the city, not as an effort of
personal display. It followed, from the spirit in which these half-yearly
dances originated, that, being given on the part of the city, every
stranger of rank was marked out as a privileged guest, and the hospitality
of the community would have been equally affronted by failing to offer or
by failing to accept the invitation.
Hence it had happened that the Russian guardsman had been introduced
into many a family which otherwise could not have hoped for such a
distinction. Upon the evening at which I am now arrived, the twentysecond of January, 1816, the whole city, in its wealthier classes, was
assembled beneath the roof of a tradesman who had the heart of a
prince. In every point our entertainment was superb; and I remarked that
the music was the finest I had heard for years. Our host was in joyous
spirits; proud to survey the splendid company he had gathered under his
roof; happy to witness their happiness; elated in their elation. Joyous was
the dance--joyous were all faces that I saw--up to midnight, very soon
after which time supper was announced; and that also, I think, was the
most joyous of all the banquets I ever witnessed. The accomplished
guardsman outshone himself in brilliancy; even his melancholy relaxed. In
fact, how could it be otherwise? near to him sat Margaret Liebenheim--
hanging upon his words--more lustrous and bewitching than ever I had
beheld her. There she had been placed by the host; and everybody knew
why. That is one of the luxuries attached to love; all men cede their
places with pleasure; women make way. Even she herself knew, though
not obliged to know, why she was seated in that neighborhood; and took
her place, if with a rosy suffusion upon her cheeks, yet with fullness of
happiness at her heart.
The guardsman pressed forward to claim Miss Liebenheim's hand for the
next dance; a movement which she was quick to favor, by retreating
behind one or two parties from a person who seemed coming toward her.
The music again began to pour its voluptuous tides through the bounding
pulses of the youthful company; again the flying feet of the dancers
began to respond to the measures; again the mounting spirit of delight
began to fill the sails of the hurrying night with steady inspiration. All
went happily. Already had one dance finished; some were pacing up and
down, leaning on the arms of their partners; some were reposing from
their exertions; when--O heavens! what a shriek! what a gathering
tumult!
Every eye was bent toward the doors--every eye strained forward to
discover what was passing. But there, every moment, less and less could
be seen, for the gathering crowd more and more intercepted the view;--
so much the more was the ear at leisure for the shrieks redoubled upon
shrieks. Miss Liebenheim had moved downward to the crowd. From her
superior height she overlooked all the ladies at the point where she stood.
In the center stood a rustic girl, whose features had been familiar to her
for some months. She had recently come into the city, and had lived with
her uncle, a tradesman, not ten doors from Margaret's own residence,
partly on the terms of a kinswoman, partly as a servant on trial. At this
moment she was exhausted with excitement, and the nature of the shock
she had sustained. Mere panic seemed to have mastered her; and she
was leaning, unconscious and weeping, upon the shoulder of some
gentleman, who was endeavoring to soothe her. A silence of horror
seemed to possess the company, most of whom were still unacquainted
with the cause of the alarming interruption. A few, however, who had
heard her first agitated words, finding that they waited in vain for a fuller
explanation, now rushed tumultuously out of the ballroom to satisfy
themselves on the spot. The distance was not great; and within five
minutes several persons returned hastily, and cried out to the crowd of
ladies that all was true which the young girl had said. "What was true?"
That her uncle Mr. Weishaupt's family had been murdered; that not one
member of the family had been spared--namely, Mr. Weishaupt himself
and his wife, neither of them much above sixty, but both infirm beyond
their years; two maiden sisters of Mr. Weishaupt, from forty to forty-six
years of age, and an elderly female domestic.
An incident happened during the recital of these horrors, and of the
details which followed, that furnished matter for conversation even in
these hours when so thrilling an interest had possession of all minds.
Many ladies fainted; among them Miss Liebenheim--and she would have
fallen to the ground but for Maximilian, who sprang forward and caught
her in his arms. She was long of returning to herself; and, during the
agony of his suspense, he stooped and kissed her pallid lips. That sight
was more than could be borne by one who stood a little behind the group.
He rushed forward, with eyes glaring like a tiger's, and leveled a blow at
Maximilian. It was poor, maniacal Von Harrelstein, who had been absent
in the forest for a week. Many people stepped forward and checked his
arm, uplifted for a repetition of this outrage. One or two had some
influence with him, and led him away from the spot; while as to
Maximilian, so absorbed was he that he had not so much as perceived the
affront offered to himself. Margaret, on reviving, was confounded at
finding herself so situated amid a great crowd; and yet the prudes
complained that there was a look of love exchanged between herself and
Maximilian, that ought not to have escaped her in such a situation. If they
meant by such a situation, one so public, it must be also recollected that
it was a situation of excessive agitation; but, if they alluded to the horrors
of the moment, no situation more naturally opens the heart to affection
and confiding love than the recoil from scenes of exquisite terror.
An examination went on that night before the magistrates, but all was
dark; although suspicion attached to a negro named Aaron, who had
occasionally been employed in menial services by the family, and had
been in the house immediately before the murder. The circumstances
were such as to leave every man in utter perplexity as to the presumption
for and against him. His mode of defending himself, and his general
deportment, were marked by the coolest, nay, the most sneering
indifference. The first thing he did, on being acquainted with the
suspicions against himself, was to laugh ferociously, and to all appearance
most cordially and unaffectedly. He demanded whether a poor man like
himself would have left so much wealth as lay scattered abroad in that
house--gold repeaters, massy plate, gold snuff boxes--untouched? That
argument certainly weighed much in his favor. And yet again it was
turned against him; for a magistrate asked him how HE happened to
know already that nothing had been touched. True it was, and a fact
which had puzzled no less than it had awed the magistrates, that, upon
their examination of the premises, many rich articles of bijouterie,
jewelry, and personal ornaments, had been found lying underanged, and
apparently in their usual situations; articles so portable that in the very
hastiest flight some might have been carried off. In particular, there was
a crucifix of gold, enriched with jewels so large and rare, that of itself it
would have constituted a prize of great magnitude. Yet this was left
untouched, though suspended in a little oratory that had been
magnificently adorned by the elder of the maiden sisters. There was an
altar, in itself a splendid object, furnished with every article of the most
costly material and workmanship, for the private celebration of mass. This
crucifix, as well as everything else in the little closet, must have been
seen by one at least of the murderous party; for hither had one of the
ladies fled; hither had one of the murderers pursued. She had clasped the
golden pillars which supported the altar--had turned perhaps her dying
looks upon the crucifix; for there, with one arm still wreathed about the
altar foot, though in her agony she had turned round upon her face, did
the elder sister lie when the magistrates first broke open the street door.
And upon the beautiful parquet, or inlaid floor which ran round the room,
were still impressed the footsteps of the murderer. These, it was hoped,
might furnish a clew to the discovery of one at least among the
murderous band. They were rather difficult to trace accurately; those
parts of the traces which lay upon the black tessellae being less distinct in
the outline than the others upon the white or colored. Most
unquestionably, so far as this went, it furnished a negative circumstance
in favor of the negro, for the footsteps were very different in outline from
his, and smaller, for Aaron was a man of colossal build. And as to his
knowledge of the state in which the premises had been found, and his
having so familiarly relied upon the fact of no robbery having taken place
as an argument on his own behalf, he contended that he had himself been
among the crowd that pushed into the house along with the magistrates;
that, from his previous acquaintance with the rooms and their ordinary
condition, a glance of the eye had been sufficient for him to ascertain the
undisturbed condition of all the valuable property most obvious to the
grasp of a robber that, in fact, he had seen enough for his argument
before he and the rest of the mob had been ejected by the magistrates;
but, finally, that independently of all this, he had heard both the officers,
as they conducted him, and all the tumultuous gatherings of people in the
street, arguing for the mysteriousness of the bloody transaction upon that
very circumstance of so much gold, silver, and jewels, being left behind
untouched.
In six weeks or less from the date of this terrific event, the negro was set
at liberty by a majority of voices among the magistrates. In that short
interval other events had occurred no less terrific and mysterious. In this
first murder, though the motive was dark and unintelligible, yet the
agency was not so; ordinary assassins apparently, and with ordinary
means, had assailed a helpless and unprepared family; had separated
them; attacked them singly in flight (for in this first case all but one of the
murdered persons appeared to have been making for the street door);
and in all this there was no subject for wonder, except the original one as
to the motive. But now came a series of cases destined to fling this
earliest murder into the shade. Nobody could now be unprepared; and yet
the tragedies, henceforward, which passed before us, one by one, in sad,
leisurely, or in terrific groups, seemed to argue a lethargy like that of
apoplexy in the victims, one and all. The very midnight of mysterious awe
fell upon all minds.
Three weeks had passed since the murder at Mr. Weishaupt's--three
weeks the most agitated that had been known in this sequestered city.
We felt ourselves solitary, and thrown upon our own resources; all
combination with other towns being unavailing from their great distance.
Our situation was no ordinary one. Had there been some mysterious
robbers among us, the chances of a visit, divided among so many, would
have been too small to distress the most timid; while to young and highspirited people, with courage to spare for ordinary trials, such a state of
expectation would have sent pulses of pleasurable anxiety among the
nerves. But murderers! exterminating murderers!--clothed in mystery and
utter darkness--these were objects too terrific for any family to
contemplate with fortitude. Had these very murderers added to their
functions those of robbery, they would have become less terrific; nine out
of every ten would have found themselves discharged, as it were, from
the roll of those who were liable to a visit; while such as knew themselves
liable would have had warning of their danger in the fact of being rich;
and would, from the very riches which constituted that danger, have
derived the means of repelling it. But, as things were, no man could
guess what it was that must make him obnoxious to the murderers.
Imagination exhausted itself in vain guesses at the causes which could by
possibility have made the poor Weishaupts objects of such hatred to any
man. True, they were bigoted in a degree which indicated feebleness of
intellect; but THAT wounded no man in particular, while to many it
recommended them. True, their charity was narrow and exclusive, but to
those of their own religious body it expanded munificently; and, being
rich beyond their wants, or any means of employing wealth which their
gloomy asceticism allowed, they had the power of doing a great deal of
good among the indigent papists of the suburbs. As to the old gentleman
and his wife, their infirmities confined them to the house. Nobody
remembered to have seen them abroad for years. How, therefore, or
when could they have made an enemy? And, with respect to the maiden
sisters of Mr. Weishaupt, they were simply weak-minded persons, now
and then too censorious, but not placed in a situation to incur serious
anger from any quarter, and too little heard of in society to occupy much
of anybody's attention.
Conceive, then, that three weeks have passed away, that the poor
Weishaupts have been laid in that narrow sanctuary which no murderer's
voice will ever violate. Quiet has not returned to us, but the first
flutterings of panic have subsided. People are beginning to respire freely
again; and such another space of time would have cicatrized our wounds-
-when, hark! a church bell rings out a loud alarm;--the night is starlight
and frosty--the iron notes are heard clear, solemn, but agitated. What
could this mean? I hurried to a room over the porter's lodge, and,
opening the window, I cried out to a man passing hastily below, "What, in
God's name, is the meaning of this?" It was a watchman belonging to our
district. I knew his voice, he knew mine, and he replied in great agitation:
"It is another murder, sir, at the old town councilor's, Albernass; and this
time they have made a clear house of it."
"God preserve us! Has a curse been pronounced upon this city? What can
be done? What are the magistrates going to do?"
"I don't know, sir. I have orders to run to the Black Friars, where another
meeting is gathering. Shall I say you will attend, sir?"
"Yes--no--stop a little. No matter, you may go on; I'll follow
immediately."
I went instantly to Maximilian's room. He was lying asleep on a sofa, at
which I was not surprised, for there had been a severe stag chase in the
morning. Even at this moment I found myself arrested by two objects,
and I paused to survey them. One was Maximilian himself. A person so
mysterious took precedency of other interests even at a time like this;
and especially by his features, which, composed in profound sleep, as
sometimes happens, assumed a new expression, which arrested me
chiefly by awaking some confused remembrance of the same features
seen under other circumstances and in times long past; but where? This
was what I could not recollect, though once before a thought of the same
sort had crossed my mind. The other object of my interest was a
miniature, which Maximilian was holding in his hand. He had gone to
sleep apparently looking at this picture; and the hand which held it had
slipped down upon the sofa, so that it was in danger of falling. I released
the miniature from his hand, and surveyed it attentively. It represented a
lady of sunny, oriental complexion, and features the most noble that it is
possible to conceive. One might have imagined such a lady, with her
raven locks and imperial eyes, to be the favorite sultana of some Amurath
or Mohammed. What was she to Maximilian, or what HAD she been? For,
by the tear which I had once seen him drop upon this miniature when he
believed himself unobserved, I conjectured that her dark tresses were
already laid low, and her name among the list of vanished things.
Probably she was his mother, for the dress was rich with pearls, and
evidently that of a person in the highest rank of court beauties. I sighed
as I thought of the stern melancholy of her son, if Maximilian were he, as
connected, probably, with the fate and fortunes of this majestic beauty;
somewhat haughty, perhaps, in the expression of her fine features, but
still noble--generous-- confiding. Laying the picture on the table, I awoke
Maximilian, and told him of the dreadful news. He listened attentively,
made no remark, but proposed that we should go together to the meeting
of our quarter at the Black Friars. He colored upon observing the
miniature on the table; and, therefore, I frankly told him in what situation
I had found it, and that I had taken the liberty of admiring it for a few
moments. He pressed it tenderly to his lips, sighed heavily, and we
walked away together.
I pass over the frenzied state of feeling in which we found the meeting.
Fear, or rather horror, did not promote harmony; many quarreled with
each other in discussing the suggestions brought forward, and Maximilian
was the only person attended to. He proposed a nightly mounted patrol
for every district. And in particular he offered, as being himself a member
of the university, that the students should form themselves into a guard,
and go out by rotation to keep watch and ward from sunset to sunrise.
Arrangements were made toward that object by the few people who
retained possession of their senses, and for the present we separated.
Never, in fact, did any events so keenly try the difference between man
and man. Some started up into heroes under the excitement. Some, alas
for the dignity of man! drooped into helpless imbecility. Women, in some
cases, rose superior to men, but yet not so often as might have happened
under a less mysterious danger. A woman is not unwomanly because she
confronts danger boldly. But I have remarked, with respect to female
courage, that it requires, more than that of men, to be sustained by
hope; and that it droops more certainly in the presence of a MYSTERIOUS
danger. The fancy of women is more active, if not stronger, and it
influences more directly the physical nature. In this case few were the
women who made even a show of defying the danger. On the contrary,
with THEM fear took the form of sadness, while with many of the men it
took that of wrath.
And how did the Russian guardsman conduct himself amidst this panic?
Many were surprised at his behavior; some complained of it; I did neither.
He took a reasonable interest in each separate case, listened to the
details with attention, and, in the examination of persons able to furnish
evidence, never failed to suggest judicious questions. But still he
manifested a coolness almost amounting to carelessness, which to many
appeared revolting. But these people I desired to notice that all the other
military students, who had been long in the army, felt exactly in the same
way. In fact, the military service of Christendom, for the last ten years,
had been anything but a parade service; and to those, therefore, who
were familiar with every form of horrid butchery, the mere outside horrors
of death had lost much of their terror. In the recent murder there had not
been much to call forth sympathy. The family consisted of two old
bachelors, two sisters, and one grandniece. The niece was absent on a
visit, and the two old men were cynical misers, to whom little personal
interest attached. Still, in this case as in that of the Weishaupts, the same
twofold mystery confounded the public mind--the mystery of the HOW,
and the profounder mystery of the WHY. Here, again, no atom of property
was taken, though both the misers had hordes of ducats and English
guineas in the very room where they died. Their bias, again, though of an
unpopular character, had rather availed to make them unknown than to
make them hateful. In one point this case differed memorably from the
other--that, instead of falling helpless, or flying victims (as the
Weishaupts had done), these old men, strong, resolute, and not so much
taken by surprise, left proofs that they had made a desperate defense.
The furniture was partly smashed to pieces, and the other details
furnished evidence still more revolting of the acharnement with which the
struggle had been maintained. In fact, with THEM a surprise must have
been impracticable, as they admitted nobody into their house on visiting
terms. It was thought singular that from each of these domestic tragedies
a benefit of the same sort should result to young persons standing in
nearly the same relation. The girl who gave the alarm at the ball, with
two little sisters, and a little orphan nephew, their cousin, divided the
very large inheritance of the Weishaupts; and in this latter case the
accumulated savings of two long lives all vested in the person of the
amiable grandniece.
But now, as if in mockery of all our anxious consultations and elaborate
devices, three fresh murders took place on the two consecutive nights
succeeding these new arrangements. And in one case, as nearly as time
could be noted, the mounted patrol must have been within call at the very
moment when the awful work was going on. I shall not dwell much upon
them; but a few circumstances are too interesting to be passed over. The
earliest case on the first of the two nights was that of a currier. He was
fifty years old; not rich, but well off. His first wife was dead, and his
daughters by her were married away from their father's house. He had
married a second wife, but, having no children by her, and keeping no
servants, it is probable that, but for an accident, no third person would
have been in the house at the time when the murderers got admittance.
About seven o'clock, a wayfaring man, a journeyman currier, who,
according to our German system, was now in his wanderjahre, entered
the city from the forest. At the gate he made some inquiries about the
curriers and tanners of our town; and, agreeably to the information he
received, made his way to this Mr. Heinberg. Mr. Heinberg refused to
admit him, until he mentioned his errand, and pushed below the door a
letter of recommendation from a Silesian correspondent, describing him
as an excellent and steady workman. Wanting such a man, and satisfied
by the answers returned that he was what he represented himself, Mr.
Heinberg unbolted his door and admitted him. Then, after slipping the
bolt into its place, he bade him sit to the fire, brought him a glass of beer,
conversed with him for ten minutes, and said: "You had better stay here
to-night; I'll tell you why afterwards; but now I'll step upstairs, and ask
my wife whether she can make up a bed for you; and do you mind the
door while I'm away." So saying, he went out of the room. Not one
minute had he been gone when there came a gentle knock at the door. It
was raining heavily, and, being a stranger to the city, not dreaming that
in any crowded town such a state of things could exist as really did in
this, the young man, without hesitation, admitted the person knocking.
He has declared since--but, perhaps, confounding the feelings gained
from better knowledge with the feelings of the moment--that from the
moment he drew the bolt he had a misgiving that he had done wrong. A
man entered in a horseman's cloak, and so muffled up that the
journeyman could discover none of his features. In a low tone the
stranger said, "Where's Heinberg?"--"Upstairs."--"Call him down, then."
The journeyman went to the door by which Mr. Heinberg had left him, and
called, "Mr. Heinberg, here's one wanting you!" Mr. Heinberg heard him,
for the man could distinctly catch these words: "God bless me! has the
man opened the door? O, the traitor! I see it." Upon this he felt more and
more consternation, though not knowing why. Just then he heard a sound
of feet behind him. On turning round, he beheld three more men in the
room; one was fastening the outer door; one was drawing some arms
from a cupboard, and two others were whispering together. He himself
was disturbed and perplexed, and felt that all was not right. Such was his
confusion, that either all the men's faces must have been muffled up, or
at least he remembered nothing distinctly but one fierce pair of eyes
glaring upon him. Then, before he could look round, came a man from
behind and threw a sack over his head, which was drawn tight about his
waist, so as to confine his arms, as well as to impede his hearing in part,
and his voice altogether. He was then pushed into a room; but previously
he had heard a rush upstairs, and words like those of a person exulting,
and then a door closed. Once it opened, and he could distinguish the
words, in one voice, "And for THAT!" to which another voice replied, in
tones that made his heart quake, "Aye, for THAT, sir." And then the same
voice went on rapidly to say, "O dog! could you hope"--at which word the
door closed again. Once he thought that he heard a scuffle, and he was
sure that he heard the sound of feet, as if rushing from one corner of a
room to another. But then all was hushed and still for about six or seven
minutes, until a voice close to his ear said, "Now, wait quietly till some
persons come in to release you. This will happen within half an hour."
Accordingly, in less than that time, he again heard the sound of feet
within the house, his own bandages were liberated, and he was brought
to tell his story at the police office. Mr. Heinberg was found in his
bedroom. He had died by strangulation, and the cord was still tightened
about his neck. During the whole dreadful scene his youthful wife had
been locked into a closet, where she heard or saw nothing.
In the second case, the object of vengeance was again an elderly man. Of
the ordinary family, all were absent at a country house, except the
master and a female servant. She was a woman of courage, and blessed
with the firmest nerves; so that she might have been relied on for
reporting accurately everything seen or heard. But things took another
course. The first warning that she had of the murderers' presence was
from their steps and voices already in the hall. She heard her master run
hastily into the hall, crying out, "Lord Jesus!--Mary, Mary, save me!" The
servant resolved to give what aid she could, seized a large poker, and
was hurrying to his assistance, when she found that they had nailed up
the door of communication at the head of the stairs. What passed after
this she could not tell; for, when the impulse of intrepid fidelity had been
balked, and she found that her own safety was provided for by means
which made it impossible to aid a poor fellow creature who had just
invoked her name, the generous-hearted creature was overcome by
anguish of mind, and sank down on the stair, where she lay, unconscious
of all that succeeded, until she found herself raised in the arms of a mob
who had entered the house. And how came they to have entered? In a
way characteristically dreadful. The night was starlit; the patrols had
perambulated the street without noticing anything suspicious, when two
foot passengers, who were following in their rear, observed a darkcolored stream traversing the causeway. One of them, at the same
instant tracing the stream backward with his eyes, observed that it flowed
from under the door of Mr. Munzer, and, dipping his finger in the trickling
fluid, he held it up to the lamplight, yelling out at the moment, "Why, this
is blood!" It was so, indeed, and it was yet warm. The other saw, heard,
and like an arrow flew after the horse patrol, then in the act of turning the
corner. One cry, full of meaning, was sufficient for ears full of expectation.
The horsemen pulled up, wheeled, and in another moment reined up at
Mr. Munzer's door. The crowd, gathering like the drifting of snow,
supplied implements which soon forced the chains of the door and all
other obstacles. But the murderous party had escaped, and all traces of
their persons had vanished, as usual.
Rarely did any case occur without some peculiarity more or less
interesting. In that which happened on the following night, making the
fifth in the series, an impressive incident varied the monotony of horrors.
In this case the parties aimed at were two elderly ladies, who conducted a
female boarding school. None of the pupils had as yet returned to school
from their vacation; but two sisters, young girls of thirteen and sixteen,
coming from a distance, had stayed at school throughout the Christmas
holidays. It was the youngest of these who gave the only evidence of any
value, and one which added a new feature of alarm to the existing panic.
Thus it was that her testimony was given: On the day before the murder,
she and her sister were sitting with the old ladies in a room fronting to
the street; the elder ladies were reading, the younger ones drawing.
Louisa, the youngest, never had her ear inattentive to the slightest sound,
and once it struck her that she heard the creaking of a foot upon the
stairs. She said nothing, but, slipping out of the room, she ascertained
that the two female servants were in the kitchen, and could not have
been absent; that all the doors and windows, by which ingress was
possible, were not only locked, but bolted and barred--a fact which
excluded all possibility of invasion by means of false keys. Still she felt
persuaded that she had heard the sound of a heavy foot upon the stairs.
It was, however, daylight, and this gave her confidence; so that, without
communicating her alarm to anybody, she found courage to traverse the
house in every direction; and, as nothing was either seen or heard, she
concluded that her ears had been too sensitively awake. Yet that night, as
she lay in bed, dim terrors assailed her, especially because she
considered that, in so large a house, some closet or other might have
been overlooked, and, in particular, she did not remember to have
examined one or two chests, in which a man could have lain concealed.
Through the greater part of the night she lay awake; but as one of the
town clocks struck four, she dismissed her anxieties, and fell asleep. The
next day, wearied with this unusual watching, she proposed to her sister
that they should go to bed earlier than usual. This they did; and, on their
way upstairs, Louisa happened to think suddenly of a heavy cloak, which
would improve the coverings of her bed against the severity of the night.
The cloak was hanging up in a closet within a closet, both leading off from
a large room used as the young ladies' dancing school. These closets she
had examined on the previous day, and therefore she felt no particular
alarm at this moment. The cloak was the first article which met her sight; 